 (a)the book of the genealogy of jesus christ (b)the son of david (c)the son of abraham. (d)abraham was the father of isaac and (e)isaac the father of jacob and (f)jacob the father of judah and his brothers  and (g)judah the father of perez and zerah by tamar and perez the father of hezron and hezron the father of ram[a]  and ram the father of amminadab and amminadab the father of nahshon and nahshon the father of salmon  and salmon the father of boaz by (h)rahab and boaz the father of obed by ruth and obed the father of jesse  and (i)jesse the father of david the king. and (j)david was the father of solomon by (k)the wife of uriah  and (l)solomon the father of rehoboam and rehoboam the father of abijah and abijah the father of asaph[b]  and asaph the father of jehoshaphat and jehoshaphat the father of joram (m)and joram the father of uzziah  and uzziah the father of jotham and jotham the father of ahaz and ahaz the father of hezekiah  and hezekiah the father of manasseh and manasseh the father of amos[c] and amos the father of josiah  and (n)josiah the father of (o)jechoniah and his brothers at the time of the deportation to babylon. and after the deportation to babylon (p)jechoniah was the father of (q)shealtiel[d] and (r)shealtiel the father of zerubbabel  and zerubbabel the father of abiud and abiud the father of eliakim and eliakim the father of azor  and azor the father of zadok and zadok the father of achim and achim the father of eliud  and eliud the father of eleazar and eleazar the father of matthan and matthan the father of jacob  and jacob the father of (s)joseph the husband of mary of whom jesus was born who is called christ. so all the generations from abraham to david were fourteen generations and from david to the deportation to babylon fourteen generations and from the deportation to babylon to (t)the christ fourteen generations. now the birth of (u)jesus christ[e] took place in this way. (v)when his mother mary had been betrothed[f] to joseph before they came together she was found to be with child (w)from the holy spirit.  and her husband joseph being a just man and unwilling (x)to put her to shame resolved to divorce her quietly.  but as he considered these things behold (y)an angel of the lord appeared to him in a dream saying “joseph son of david do not fear to take mary as your wife for that which is conceived in her is from the holy spirit.  she will bear a son and (z)you shall call his name jesus (aa)for he will save his people from their sins.”  (ab)all this took place (ac)to fulfill what the lord had spoken by the prophet (ad)“behold the virgin shall conceive and bear a son    and they shall call his name (ae)immanuel” (which means god (af)with us).  when joseph woke from sleep he did as the angel of the lord commanded him he took his wife  but knew her not until she had given birth to a son. and (ag)he called his name jesus. now (a)after jesus was born in (b)bethlehem of judea (c)in the days of herod the king behold wise men[a] from (d)the east came to jerusalem  saying “where is he who has been born (e)king of the jews? for we saw (f)his star when it rose[b] and have come to (g)worship him.”  when herod the king heard this he was troubled and all jerusalem with him  and assembling all the chief priests and scribes of the people he inquired of them where (h)the christ was to be born.  they told him “in bethlehem of judea for so it is written by the prophet (i)“‘and you o bethlehem in the land of judah    are by no means least among the rulers of judahfor from you shall come a ruler    who will (j)shepherd my people israel.’” then herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared.  and he sent them to bethlehem saying “go and search diligently for the child and when you have found him bring me word that i too may come and worship him.”  after listening to the king they went on their way. and behold the star that they had seen when it rose went before them until it came to rest over the place where the child was.  when they saw the star they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy.  and going into the house they saw the child with mary his mother and they fell down and worshiped him. then opening their treasures (k)they offered him gifts (l)gold and (m)frankincense and (n)myrrh.  and (o)being warned (p)in a dream not to return to herod they departed to their own country by another way. now when they had departed behold (q)an angel of the lord appeared to joseph in a dream and said “rise take the child and his mother and flee to egypt and remain there until i tell you for herod is about to search for the child to destroy him.”  and he rose and took the child and his mother by night and departed to egypt  and remained there until the death of herod. (r)this was to fulfill what the lord had spoken by the prophet (s)“out of egypt i called my son.” then herod when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men became furious and he sent and killed all the male children in bethlehem and in all that region who were two years old or under according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men.  (t)then was fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet jeremiah (u)“a voice was heard in ramah    weeping and loud lamentationrachel weeping for her children    she refused to be comforted because they (v)are no more.” but when herod died behold an angel of the lord appeared in a dream to joseph in egypt  saying “rise take the child and his mother and go to the land of israel for (w)those who sought the child's life are dead.”  and he rose and took the child and his mother and went to the land of israel.  but when he heard that archelaus was reigning over judea in place of his father herod he was afraid to go there and (x)being warned in a dream he withdrew to the district of galilee.  and he went and lived in a city called (y)nazareth (z)so that what was spoken by the prophets might be fulfilled that he would be called a nazarene. (a)in those days (b)john the baptist came preaching in (c)the wilderness of judea  (d)“repent for (e)the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”[a]  for this is he who was spoken of by the prophet isaiah when he said (f)“the voice of one crying in the wilderness(g)‘prepare[b] the way of the lord    make his paths straight.’” now john wore (h)a garment of camel's hair and a leather belt around his waist and his food was (i)locusts and (j)wild honey.  then jerusalem and all judea and all the region about the jordan were going out to him  and they were baptized by him in the river jordan (k)confessing their sins. but when he saw many of (l)the pharisees and (m)sadducees coming to his baptism he said to them (n)“you brood of (o)vipers! who warned you to flee from (p)the wrath to come?  bear fruit (q)in keeping with repentance.  and do not presume to say to yourselves (r)‘we have abraham as our father’ for i tell you god is able from (s)these stones to raise up children for abraham.  even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. (t)every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. (u)“i baptize you with water (v)for repentance but (w)he who is coming after me is mightier than i whose sandals i am not worthy to carry. he will baptize you (x)with the holy spirit and (y)fire.  his (z)winnowing fork is in his hand and he will clear his threshing floor and (aa)gather his wheat into the barn (ab)but the chaff he will burn with (ac)unquenchable fire.” (ad)then jesus came (ae)from galilee to the jordan to john to be baptized by him.  (af)john would have prevented him saying “i need to be baptized by you and do you come to me?”  but jesus answered him “let it be so now for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.” then he consented.  and when jesus was baptized immediately he went up from the water and behold (ag)the heavens were opened to him[c] and he (ah)saw the spirit of god descending like a dove and coming to rest on him  and behold (ai)a voice from heaven said (aj)“this is my beloved son[d] with whom i am well pleased.” (a)then jesus was led up by the spirit into the wilderness (b)to be tempted by the devil.  and after fasting (c)forty days and forty nights he (d)was hungry.  and (e)the tempter came and said to him “if you are (f)the son of god command (g)these stones to become loaves of bread.”  but he answered (h)“it is written (i)“‘man shall not live by bread alone    but by every word that comes from the mouth of god.’” (j)then the devil took him to (k)the holy city and set him on the pinnacle of the temple  and said to him “if you are the son of god throw yourself down for it is written (l)“‘he will command his angels concerning you’ and “‘on their hands they will bear you up    lest you strike your foot against a stone.’” jesus said to him “again (m)it is written (n)‘you shall not (o)put the lord your god to the test.’”  (p)again the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.  and he said to him “all these i will give you if you will fall down and worship me.”  then jesus said to him “be gone (q)satan! for (r)it is written (s)“‘you shall worship the lord your god    and (t)him only shall you serve.’” then the devil left him and behold (u)angels came and were ministering to him. now when he heard that (v)john had been arrested (w)he withdrew into galilee.  and leaving (x)nazareth he went and lived in (y)capernaum by (z)the sea in the territory of (aa)zebulun and naphtali  (ab)so that what was spoken by the prophet isaiah might be fulfilled (ac)“the land of zebulun and the land of naphtali    the way of the sea beyond the jordan galilee of the gentiles— (ad)the people dwelling in darkness    have seen a great lightand for those dwelling in the region and (ae)shadow of death    on them a light has dawned.” (af)from that time jesus began to preach saying (ag)“repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”[a] (ah)while walking by (ai)the sea of galilee he saw two brothers simon (who is called peter) and andrew his brother casting a net into the sea for they were fishermen.  and he said to them “follow me and i will make you (aj)fishers of men.”[b]  immediately they left their nets and followed him.  and going on from there he saw two other brothers james the son of zebedee and john his brother in the boat with zebedee their father mending their nets and he called them.  immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him. (ak)and he went throughout all galilee (al)teaching in their synagogues and (am)proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom and (an)healing every disease and every affliction among the people.  so his fame spread throughout all (ao)syria and (ap)they brought him all the sick those afflicted with various diseases and (aq)pains (ar)those oppressed by demons (as)those having seizures and (at)paralytics and he healed them.  (au)and great crowds followed him from galilee and the (av)decapolis and from jerusalem and judea and from beyond the jordan. seeing the crowds (a)he went up on the mountain and when he (b)sat down his disciples came to him. and (c)he opened his mouth and taught them saying (d)“blessed are (e)the poor in spirit for (f)theirs is the kingdom of heaven. “blessed are (g)those who mourn for they shall be comforted. “blessed are the (h)meek for they (i)shall inherit the earth. “blessed are those who hunger and (j)thirst (k)for righteousness for they shall be satisfied. “blessed are (l)the merciful for they shall receive mercy. “blessed are (m)the pure in heart for (n)they shall see god. “blessed are (o)the peacemakers for (p)they shall be called (q)sons[a] of god. (r)“blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake for (s)theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (t)“blessed are you when others revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely (u)on my account.  (v)rejoice and be glad for your reward is great in heaven for (w)so they persecuted the prophets who were before you. “you are the salt of the earth (x)but if salt has lost its taste how shall its saltiness be restored? it is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled under people's feet. (y)“you are the light of the world. a city set on a hill cannot be hidden.  (z)nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket but on a stand and it gives light to all in the house.  in the same way let your light shine before others so (aa)that[b] they may see your good works and (ab)give glory to your father who is in heaven. (ac)“do not think that i have come to abolish (ad)the law or the prophets i have not come to abolish them but (ae)to fulfill them.  for truly i say to you (af)until heaven and earth pass away not an iota not a dot will pass from the law until all is accomplished.  (ag)therefore whoever relaxes (ah)one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least (ai)in the kingdom of heaven but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great (aj)in the kingdom of heaven.  for i tell you unless your righteousness exceeds (ak)that of the scribes and pharisees you (al)will never enter the kingdom of heaven. (am)“you have heard that it was said to those of old (an)‘you shall not murder and whoever murders will be liable (ao)to judgment.’  but i say to you that (ap)everyone who is angry with his brother[c] will be liable (aq)to judgment whoever insults[d] his brother will be liable to the council and whoever says ‘you fool!’ will be liable to (ar)the hell[e] of fire.  (as)so if (at)you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you  leave your gift there before the altar and go. first be reconciled to your brother and then come and offer your gift.  (au)come to terms quickly with your accuser while you are going with him to court lest your accuser hand you over to the judge and the judge to the guard and you be put in prison.  truly i say to you (av)you will never get out until you have paid the last penny.[f] (aw)“you have heard that it was said (ax)‘you shall not commit adultery.’  but i say to you that (ay)everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart.  (az)if your right eye (ba)causes you to sin tear it out and throw it away. for it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body be thrown into (bb)hell.  (bc)and if your right hand (bd)causes you to sin cut it off and throw it away. for it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body go into (be)hell. (bf)“it was also said (bg)‘whoever divorces his wife let him give her a certificate of divorce.’  (bh)but i say to you that everyone who divorces his wife except on the ground of sexual immorality makes her commit adultery and (bi)whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery. “again (bj)you have heard that it was said to those of old (bk)‘you shall not swear falsely but (bl)shall perform to the lord what you have sworn.’  but i say to you (bm)do not take an oath at all either by heaven for (bn)it is the throne of god  or by the earth for it is his footstool or by jerusalem for it is (bo)the city of the great king.  and do not take an oath by your head for you cannot make one hair white or black.  let what you say be simply ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (bp)anything more than this comes from evil.[g] (bq)“you have heard that it was said (br)‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’  but i say to you (bs)do not resist the one who is evil. but (bt)if anyone (bu)slaps you on the right cheek turn to him the other also.  and (bv)if anyone would sue you and take your tunic[h] let him have your cloak as well.  and if anyone (bw)forces you to go one mile go with him two miles.  (bx)give to the one who begs from you and (by)do not refuse the one who would borrow from you. (bz)“you have heard that it was said (ca)‘you shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’  but i say to you (cb)love your enemies and (cc)pray for those who persecute you  (cd)so that you may be sons of your father who is in heaven. for he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good and (ce)sends rain on the just and on the unjust.  (cf)for if you love those who love you what reward do you have? do not even the tax collectors do the same?  and if you greet only your brothers[i] what more are you doing than others? do not even (cg)the gentiles do the same?  (ch)you therefore must be (ci)perfect (cj)as your heavenly father is perfect. “beware of (a)practicing your righteousness before other people in order (b)to be seen by them for then you will have no reward from your father who is in heaven. (c)“thus when you give to the needy sound no trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets that they may (d)be praised by others. truly i say to you they have (e)received their reward.  but when you give to the needy do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing  so that your giving may be in secret. (f)and your father who sees in secret will reward you. “and when you pray you must not be like the hypocrites. for they love (g)to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners that they may be seen by others. (h)truly i say to you they have received their reward.  but when you pray (i)go into your room and shut the door and pray to your father who is in secret. (j)and your father who sees in secret will reward you. “and when you pray do not heap up empty phrases as (k)the gentiles do for (l)they think that they will be heard (m)for their many words.  do not be like them (n)for your father knows what you need before you ask him.  (o)pray then like this (p)“our father in heaven(q)hallowed be (r)your name.[a] (s)your kingdom come(t)your will be done[b]    (u)on earth as it is in heaven. (v)give us (w)this day our daily bread[c] and forgive us our debts    as we also have forgiven our debtors. and (x)lead us not into temptation    but (y)deliver us from (z)evil.[d] (aa)for if you forgive others their trespasses your heavenly father will also forgive you  (ab)but if you do not forgive others their trespasses neither will your father forgive your trespasses. “and (ac)when you fast do not look gloomy like the hypocrites for they disfigure their faces that their fasting may be seen by others. (ad)truly i say to you they have received their reward.  but when you fast (ae)anoint your head and wash your face  that your fasting may not be seen by others but by your father who is in secret. (af)and your father who sees in secret will reward you. (ag)“do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth where (ah)moth and rust[e] destroy and where thieves (ai)break in and steal  (aj)but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.  for where your treasure is there your heart will be also. (ak)“the eye is the lamp of the body. so if your eye is healthy your whole body will be full of light  (al)but if (am)your eye is bad your whole body will be full of darkness. if then the light in you is darkness how great is the darkness! (an)“no one can serve two masters for either he will hate the one and love the other or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. you cannot serve god and (ao)money.[f] (ap)“therefore i tell you (aq)do not be anxious about your life what you will eat or what you will drink nor about your body what you will put on. is not life more than food and the body more than clothing?  (ar)look at the birds of the air they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns and yet your heavenly father feeds them. (as)are you not of more value than they?  and which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his (at)span of life?[g]  and why are you anxious about clothing? consider the lilies of the field how they grow they neither toil nor spin  yet i tell you (au)even solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.  but if god so clothes the grass of the field which today is alive and tomorrow is thrown into the oven will he not much more clothe you (av)o you of little faith?  therefore do not be anxious saying ‘what shall we eat?’ or ‘what shall we drink?’ or ‘what shall we wear?’  for (aw)the gentiles seek after all these things and (ax)your heavenly father knows that you need them all.  but (ay)seek first (az)the kingdom of god and his righteousness (ba)and all these things will be added to you. (bb)“therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. sufficient for the day is its own trouble. (a)“judge not that you be not judged.  (b)for with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged and (c)with the measure you use it will be measured to you.  why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye but (d)do not notice the log that is in your own eye?  or how can you say to your brother ‘let me take the speck out of your eye’ when there is the log in your own eye?  you hypocrite first take the log out of your own eye and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your brother's eye. (e)“do not give (f)dogs what is holy and do not throw your (g)pearls before pigs lest they trample them underfoot and turn to attack you. (h)“ask (i)and it will be given to you (j)seek and you will find (k)knock and it will be opened to you.  for everyone who asks receives and the one who seeks finds and to the one who knocks it will be opened.  or which one of you if his son asks him for (l)bread will give him (m)a stone?  or if he asks for a fish will give him a serpent?  if you then (n)who are evil know how to give good gifts to your children how much more will (o)your father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him! “so (p)whatever you wish that others would do to you do also to them for this is (q)the law and the prophets. (r)“enter by the narrow gate. for the gate is wide and the way is easy[a] that leads to destruction and those who enter by it are many.  for the gate is narrow and (s)the way is hard that leads to life and (t)those who find it are few. (u)“beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep's clothing but inwardly are (v)ravenous wolves.  you will recognize them (w)by their fruits. are grapes gathered from thornbushes or figs from thistles?  so (x)every healthy tree bears good fruit but the diseased tree bears bad fruit.  a healthy tree cannot bear bad fruit nor can a diseased tree bear good fruit.  (y)every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.  thus you will recognize them (z)by their fruits. (aa)“not everyone who (ab)says to me ‘lord lord’ will (ac)enter the kingdom of heaven but the one who (ad)does the will of my father who is in heaven.  (ae)on that day (af)many will say to me ‘lord lord did we not (ag)prophesy in your name and cast out demons (ah)in your name and do many mighty works in your name?’  (ai)and then will i declare to them ‘i (aj)never knew you (ak)depart from me (al)you workers of lawlessness.’ (am)“everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them will be like (an)a wise man who built his house on the rock.  and the rain fell and the floods came and the winds blew and beat on that house but it did not fall because it had been founded on the rock.  and everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like (ao)a foolish man who built his house on the sand.  and the rain fell and the floods came and the winds blew and beat against that house and it fell and great was the fall of it.” and when jesus finished these sayings (ap)the crowds were astonished at his teaching  (aq)for he was teaching them as one who had authority and not as their scribes. when he came down from the mountain (a)great crowds followed him.  (b)and behold a leper[a] came to him and (c)knelt before him saying “lord if you will you can make me clean.”  and jesus[b] stretched out his hand and touched him saying “i will be clean.” and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.  and jesus said to him (d)“see that you say nothing to anyone but go (e)show yourself to the priest and (f)offer the gift that moses commanded (g)for a proof to them.” (h)when he had entered capernaum a centurion came forward to him appealing to him  “lord my servant is lying paralyzed at home suffering terribly.”  and he said to him “i will come and heal him.”  but the centurion replied “lord i am not worthy to have you come under my roof but (i)only say the word and my servant will be healed.  for i too am a man under authority with soldiers under me. and i say to one ‘go’ and he goes and to another ‘come’ and he comes and to my servant[c] ‘do this’ and he does it.”  when jesus heard this (j)he marveled and said to those who followed him “truly i tell you with (k)no one in israel[d] have i found such faith.  i tell you (l)many will come from east and west and recline at table with abraham isaac and jacob in the kingdom of heaven  (m)while the sons of the kingdom (n)will be thrown into the outer darkness. in that place (o)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”  and to the centurion jesus said “go let it be done for you (p)as you have believed.” (q)and the servant was healed at that very moment. (r)and when jesus entered peter's house he saw (s)his motherinlaw lying sick with a fever.  he (t)touched her hand and the fever left her and she rose and began to serve him.  that evening they brought to him many who were (u)oppressed by demons and he cast out the spirits (v)with a word and healed all who were sick.  (w)this was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet isaiah (x)“he took our illnesses and bore our diseases.” now (y)when jesus saw a crowd around him (z)he gave orders to go over to the other side.  (aa)and a scribe came up and said to him “teacher i will follow you wherever you go.”  and jesus said to him “foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests but the son of man has nowhere to lay his head.”  another of the disciples said to him “lord let me first go and bury my father.”  and jesus said to him “follow me and leave (ab)the dead to bury their own dead.” (ac)and when he got into the boat his disciples followed him.  and behold there arose a great storm on the sea so that the boat was being swamped by the waves but (ad)he was asleep.  and they went and woke him saying (ae)“save us lord we are perishing.”  and he said to them “why are you (af)afraid (ag)o you of little faith?” then he rose and (ah)rebuked the winds and the sea and (ai)there was a great calm.  and the men (aj)marveled saying “what sort of man is this that even (ak)winds and sea obey him?” (al)and when he came to the other side to the country of the gadarenes[e] two (am)demonpossessed[f] men met him coming out of the tombs so fierce that no one could pass that way.  and behold they (an)cried out “what have you to do with us (ao)o son of god? have you come here to torment us (ap)before the time?”  now a herd of many pigs was feeding at some distance from them.  and the demons begged him saying “if you cast us out send us away into the herd of pigs.”  and he said to them “go.” so they came out and went into the pigs and behold the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned in the waters.  the herdsmen fled and going into the city they told everything especially what had happened to the (aq)demonpossessed men.  and behold all the city came out to meet jesus and when they saw him (ar)they begged him to leave their region. and getting into a boat he crossed over and came to (a)his own city.  (b)and behold some people brought to him a paralytic lying on a bed. and when jesus (c)saw their faith he said to the paralytic (d)“take heart my son (e)your sins are forgiven.”  and behold some of the scribes said to themselves (f)“this man is blaspheming.”  but jesus (g)knowing[a] their thoughts said “why do you think evil in your hearts?  for which is easier to say ‘your sins are forgiven’ or to say ‘rise and walk’?  but that you may know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he then said to the paralytic—“rise pick up your bed and go home.”  and he rose and went home.  when the crowds saw it (h)they were afraid and (i)they glorified god who had (j)given such authority to men. (k)as jesus passed on from there he saw a man called (l)matthew sitting at the tax booth and he said to him “follow me.” and he rose and followed him. and as jesus[b] reclined at table in the house behold many (m)tax collectors and sinners came and were reclining with jesus and his disciples.  and when the pharisees saw this they said to his disciples (n)“why does your teacher eat with (o)tax collectors and sinners?”  but when he heard it he said “those who are well have no need of a physician but those who are sick.  go and learn (p)what this means (q)‘i desire mercy and not sacrifice.’ for (r)i came not to call the righteous (s)but sinners.” then (t)the disciples of john came to him saying (u)“why do we and (v)the pharisees fast[c] but your disciples do not fast?”  and jesus said to them (w)“can the wedding guests mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? (x)the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them and (y)then they will fast.  no one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment for the patch tears away from the garment and a worse tear is made.  neither is new wine put into old (z)wineskins. if it is the skins burst and the wine is spilled and the skins are destroyed. but new wine is put into fresh wineskins and so both are preserved.” (aa)while he was saying these things to them behold a ruler came in and (ab)knelt before him saying “my daughter has just died but come and lay your hand on her and she will live.”  and jesus rose and followed him with his disciples.  and behold a woman (ac)who had suffered from a discharge of blood for twelve years came up behind him and touched (ad)the fringe of his garment  for she said to herself “if i only touch his garment i will be made well.”  jesus turned and seeing her he said (ae)“take heart daughter your faith has made you well.” (af)and instantly[d] the woman was made well.  and when jesus came to the ruler's house and saw (ag)the flute players and the crowd making a commotion  he said “go away for (ah)the girl is not dead but (ai)sleeping.” and they laughed at him.  but (aj)when the crowd had been put outside he went in and (ak)took her by the hand and the girl arose.  and the report of this went through all that district. (al)and as jesus passed on from there two blind men followed him crying aloud “have mercy on us (am)son of david.”  when he entered the house the blind men came to him and jesus said to them “do you believe that i am able to do this?” they said to him “yes lord.”  (an)then he touched their eyes saying (ao)“according to your faith be it done to you.”  and their eyes were opened. and jesus sternly warned them (ap)“see that no one knows about it.”  (aq)but they went away and spread his fame through all that district. as they were going away behold a (ar)demonoppressed man who was mute (as)was brought to him.  and when the demon had been cast out the mute man spoke. and the crowds (at)marveled saying “never was anything like this seen in israel.”  but the pharisees said “he casts out demons by the prince of demons.” (au)and jesus went throughout all the cities and villages teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom and healing every disease and every affliction.  (av)when he saw the crowds (aw)he had compassion for them because they were harassed and helpless (ax)like sheep without a shepherd.  (ay)then he said to his disciples “the harvest is plentiful but the laborers are few  therefore (az)pray earnestly to the lord of the harvest to (ba)send out laborers into his harvest.” (a)and he called to him his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits to cast them out and to heal every disease and every affliction.  (b)the names of the twelve apostles are these first simon (c)who is called peter and (d)andrew his brother (e)james the son of zebedee and john his brother  philip and bartholomew thomas and (f)matthew the tax collector james the son of alphaeus and thaddaeus[a]  simon the zealot[b] and judas iscariot who betrayed him. (g)these twelve jesus sent out instructing them “go nowhere among the gentiles and enter no town of (h)the samaritans  (i)but go rather to (j)the lost sheep of (k)the house of israel.  and proclaim as you go saying (l)‘the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’[c]  (m)heal the sick raise the dead cleanse lepers[d] cast out demons. (n)you received without paying give without pay.  (o)acquire no gold or silver or copper for your belts  no bag for your journey or two tunics[e] or sandals or a staff for (p)the laborer deserves his food.  and whatever town or village you enter find out who is worthy in it and stay there until you depart.  as you enter the house (q)greet it.  and if the house is (r)worthy let (s)your peace come upon it but if it is not worthy let (t)your peace return to you.  and if anyone will not receive you or listen to your words (u)shake off the dust from your feet when you leave that house or town.  truly i say to you (v)it will be more bearable on the day of judgment for (w)the land of sodom and gomorrah than for that town. (x)“behold i am sending you out as sheep in the midst of wolves so be (y)wise as serpents and (z)innocent as doves.  beware of men for (aa)they will deliver you over to courts and flog you (ab)in their synagogues  (ac)and you will be dragged before governors and kings for my sake (ad)to bear witness before them and the gentiles.  (ae)when (af)they deliver you over (ag)do not be anxious how you are to speak or what you are to say for (ah)what you are to say will be given to you in that hour.  (ai)for it is not you who speak but (aj)the spirit of your father speaking through you.  (ak)brother will deliver brother over to death and the father his child and children will rise against parents and have them put to death  (al)and you will be hated by all for my name's sake. (am)but the one who endures to the end will be saved.  when they (an)persecute you in one town (ao)flee to the next for truly i say to you you will not have gone through all the towns of israel (ap)before the son of man comes. (aq)“a disciple is not above his teacher nor a servant[f] above his master.  it is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher and the servant like his master. (ar)if they have called the master of the house beelzebul how much more will they malign[g] those of his household. “so have no fear of them (as)for nothing is covered that will not be revealed or hidden that will not be known.  what i tell you in the dark say in the light and what you hear whispered proclaim on (at)the housetops.  and (au)do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. rather fear him (av)who can destroy both soul and body in hell.[h]  are not two sparrows sold for a penny?[i] and not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your father.  but (aw)even the hairs of your head are all numbered.  fear not therefore (ax)you are of more value than many sparrows.  (ay)so everyone who acknowledges me before men i also will acknowledge before my father who is in heaven  but (az)whoever denies me before men (ba)i also will deny before my father who is in heaven. (bb)“do not think that i have come to bring peace to the earth. (bc)i have not come to bring peace but a sword.  (bd)for i have come (be)to set a man against his father and a daughter against her mother and a daughterinlaw against her motherinlaw.  (bf)and a person's enemies will be those of his own household.  (bg)whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.  and (bh)whoever does not take his cross and (bi)follow me is not worthy of me.  (bj)whoever finds his life will lose it and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. (bk)“whoever receives you receives me and (bl)whoever receives me receives him who sent me.  (bm)the one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward and the one who receives a righteous person because he is a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward.  and (bn)whoever gives one of (bo)these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple truly i say to you he will by no means lose his reward.” when jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples he went on from there to teach and preach in their cities. (a)now when john heard (b)in prison about the deeds of (c)the christ he sent word by (d)his disciples  and said to him “are you (e)the one who is to come or shall we (f)look for another?”  and jesus answered them “go and tell john what you hear and see  (g)the blind receive their sight and the lame walk lepers[a] are cleansed and the deaf hear and the dead are raised up and (h)the poor have good news preached to them.  and blessed is the one who (i)is not offended by me.” as they went away jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning john “what did you go out (j)into the wilderness to see? (k)a reed shaken by the wind?  what then did you go out to see? a man[b] dressed in soft clothing? behold those who wear soft clothing are in kings' houses.  what then did you go out to see? (l)a prophet?[c] yes i tell you and more than a prophet.  this is he of whom it is written (m)“‘behold i send my messenger before your face    who will prepare your way before you.’ truly i say to you among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than john the baptist. yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.  (n)from the days of john the baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence[d] and the violent take it by force.  (o)for all the prophets and the law prophesied until john  and if you are willing to accept it he is (p)elijah who is to come.  (q)he who has ears to hear[e] let him hear. “but to what shall i compare this generation? it is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates “‘we played the flute for you and you did not dance    we sang a dirge and you did not mourn.’ for john came (r)neither eating (s)nor drinking and they say ‘he has a demon.’  the son of man came (t)eating and drinking and they say ‘look at him! a glutton and a drunkard (u)a friend of (v)tax collectors and sinners!’ yet wisdom is justified by her deeds.”[f] (w)then he began to denounce the cities where most of his mighty works had been done because they did not repent.  (x)“woe to you chorazin! woe to you bethsaida! for if the mighty works done in you had been done in (y)tyre and sidon they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.  (z)but i tell you it will be more bearable on (aa)the day of judgment for (ab)tyre and sidon than for you.  and you (ac)capernaum will you be exalted to heaven? you will be brought down to (ad)hades. for if the mighty works done in you had been done in sodom it would have remained until this day.  (ae)but i tell you that (af)it will be more tolerable on (ag)the day of judgment for the land of sodom than for you.” (ah)at that time jesus declared “i thank you father (ai)lord of heaven and earth that (aj)you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and (ak)revealed them to little children  yes father for such was your (al)gracious will.[g]  (am)all things have been handed over to me by my father and no one knows the son (an)except the father and no one knows the father except the son and anyone (ao)to whom the son chooses to reveal him.  (ap)come to (aq)me all who labor and are (ar)heavy laden and i will give you rest.  take my yoke upon you and (as)learn from me for i am (at)gentle and lowly in heart and (au)you will find rest for your souls.  for (av)my yoke is easy and my burden is light.” at that time (a)jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath. his disciples were hungry and (b)they began to pluck heads of grain and to eat.  but when the pharisees saw it they said to him (c)“look your disciples are doing (d)what is not lawful to do on the sabbath.”  he said to them (e)“have you not read what david did when he was hungry and those who were with him  how he entered the house of god and ate (f)the bread of the presence which it was not lawful for him to eat nor for those who were with him but only for the priests?  or have you not read (g)in the law how on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath and are guiltless?  i tell you (h)something greater than the temple is here.  and if you had known (i)what this means (j)‘i desire mercy and not sacrifice’ you would not have condemned the guiltless.  for (k)the son of man is lord of the sabbath.” he went on from there and (l)entered their synagogue.  and a man was there with a withered hand. and they asked him (m)“is it lawful to heal on the sabbath?”—(n)so that they might accuse him.  he said to them “which one of you who has a sheep (o)if it falls into a pit on the sabbath will not take hold of it and lift it out?  (p)of how much more value is a man than a sheep! so (q)it is lawful to do good on the sabbath.”  then he said to the man “stretch out your hand.” and (r)the man stretched it out and it was restored healthy like the other.  but the pharisees went out and conspired against him how to destroy him. jesus aware of this (s)withdrew from there. and (t)many followed him and he healed them all  and (u)ordered them not to make him known.  (v)this was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet isaiah (w)“behold my (x)servant whom i have chosen    my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased.(y)i will put my spirit upon him    and he will proclaim justice to the gentiles. he will not quarrel or cry aloud    nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets a bruised reed he will not break    and a smoldering wick he will not quenchuntil he brings justice to victory     (z)and in his name the gentiles will hope.” (aa)then a demonoppressed man who was blind and mute was brought to him and he healed him so that the man spoke and saw.  (ab)and all the people were amazed and said (ac)“can this be the son of david?”  but when the pharisees heard it they said (ad)“it is only by beelzebul the prince of demons that this man casts out demons.”  (ae)knowing their thoughts (af)he said to them “every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste and no city or house divided against itself will stand.  and if satan casts out satan he is divided against himself. how then will his kingdom stand?  and if i cast out demons by beelzebul (ag)by whom do (ah)your sons cast them out? therefore they will be your judges.  but if it is (ai)by the spirit of god that i cast out demons then (aj)the kingdom of god has come upon you.  or (ak)how can someone enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man? then indeed (al)he may plunder his house.  (am)whoever is not with me is against me and whoever does not gather with me scatters.  (an)therefore i tell you every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people but (ao)the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.  and whoever speaks a word (ap)against the son of man (aq)will be forgiven but (ar)whoever speaks against the holy spirit will not be forgiven either in (as)this age or in the age to come. (at)“either make the tree good and its fruit good or make the tree bad and its fruit bad (au)for the tree is known by its fruit.  (av)you brood of vipers! how can you speak good (aw)when you are evil? (ax)for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.  (ay)the good person out of his good treasure brings forth good and the evil person out of his evil treasure brings forth evil.  i tell you (az)on the day of judgment (ba)people will give account for (bb)every careless word they speak  for (bc)by your words you will be justified and by your words you will be condemned.” then some of the scribes and pharisees answered him saying “teacher (bd)we wish to see a sign from you.”  but he answered them (be)“an evil and (bf)adulterous generation seeks for a sign but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet jonah.  for (bg)just as jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish (bh)so will the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.  (bi)the men of nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and (bj)condemn it for (bk)they repented at the preaching of jonah and behold (bl)something greater than jonah is here.  (bm)the queen of the south will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon and behold (bn)something greater than solomon is here. “when (bo)the unclean spirit has gone out of a person it passes through (bp)waterless places seeking rest but finds none.  then it says ‘i will return to my house from which i came.’ and when it comes it finds the house empty swept and put in order.  then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself and they enter and dwell there and (bq)the last state of that person is worse than the first. so also will it be with this (br)evil generation.” while he was still speaking to the people behold (bs)his mother and his (bt)brothers[a] stood outside asking to speak to him.[b]  but he replied to the man who told him “who is my mother and who are my brothers?”  and stretching out his hand toward his disciples he said “here are my mother and my brothers!  for (bu)whoever (bv)does the will of my father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.” that same day jesus went out of the house (a)and sat beside the sea.  and great crowds gathered about him (b)so that he got into a boat and sat down. and the whole crowd stood on the beach.  and (c)he told them many things in parables saying (d)“a sower went out to sow.  and as he sowed some seeds fell along the path and the birds came and devoured them.  other seeds fell on rocky ground where they did not have much soil and immediately they sprang up since they had no depth of soil  but (e)when the sun rose they were scorched. and since they had no root (f)they withered away.  other seeds fell among (g)thorns and the thorns grew up and choked them.  other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain some (h)a hundredfold some sixty some thirty.  (i)he who has ears[a] let him hear.” then the disciples came and said to him “why do you speak to them in parables?”  and he answered them (j)“to you it has been given to know (k)the secrets of the kingdom of heaven but to them it has not been given.  (l)for to the one who has more will be given and he will have an abundance but from the one who has not (m)even what he has will be taken away.  this is why i speak to them in parables because (n)seeing they do not see and hearing they do not hear (o)nor do they understand.  indeed in their case the prophecy of isaiah is fulfilled that says (p)“‘“you will indeed hear but never understand    and you will indeed see but never perceive.” for this people's heart has grown dull    and with their ears (q)they can barely hear    and (r)their eyes they have closedlest they should see with their eyes    and hear with their earsand (s)understand with their heart    and (t)turn and i would heal them.’ but (u)blessed are your eyes for they see and your ears for they hear.  (v)for truly i say to you (w)many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see and did not see it and to hear what you hear and did not hear it. (x)“hear then the parable of the sower  when anyone hears the word of (y)the kingdom and (z)does not understand it (aa)the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart. this is what was sown along the path.  as for what was sown on rocky ground this is the one who hears the word and immediately (ab)receives it with joy  yet he has no root in himself but (ac)endures for a while and when tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word immediately (ad)he falls away.[b]  as for what was sown among thorns this is the one who hears the word but (ae)the cares of (af)the world and (ag)the deceitfulness of riches choke the word and it proves unfruitful.  as for what was sown on good soil this is the one who hears the word and (ah)understands it. he indeed (ai)bears fruit and yields in one case (aj)a hundredfold in another sixty and in another thirty.” he put another parable before them saying (ak)“the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man who sowed good seed in his field  but while his men were sleeping his enemy came and sowed weeds[c] among the wheat and went away.  so when the plants came up and bore grain then the weeds appeared also.  and the servants[d] of the master of the house came and said to him ‘master did you not sow good seed in your field? how then does it have weeds?’  he said to them ‘an enemy has done this.’ so the servants said to him ‘then do you want us to go and gather them?’  but he said (al)‘no lest in gathering the weeds you root up the wheat along with them.  let both grow together until the harvest and at harvest time i will tell the reapers (am)“gather the weeds first and bind them in bundles to be burned but gather the wheat into my barn.”’” he put another parable before them saying (an)“the kingdom of heaven is like (ao)a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.  it is the smallest of all seeds but when it has grown it is larger than all the garden plants and becomes a tree so that the birds of the air come and make nests in its branches.” he told them another parable. (ap)“the kingdom of heaven is like leaven that a woman took and hid in (aq)three measures of flour till it was (ar)all leavened.” (as)all these things jesus said to the crowds in parables indeed he said nothing to them without a parable.  this was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet[e] (at)“i will open my mouth in parables    (au)i will utter what has been hidden (av)since the foundation of the world.” then he left the crowds and went into (aw)the house. and his disciples came to him saying (ax)“explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field.”  he answered “the one who sows the good seed is the son of man.  the field is the world and the good seed is (ay)the sons of the kingdom. the weeds are (az)the sons of the evil one  and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. (ba)the harvest is (bb)the end of the age and the reapers are angels.  just as the weeds (bc)are gathered and burned with fire so will it be at (bd)the end of the age.  (be)the son of man will send his angels and they will gather out of his kingdom all (bf)causes of sin and (bg)all lawbreakers  (bh)and throw them into the fiery furnace. in that place (bi)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.  then (bj)the righteous will shine like the sun (bk)in the kingdom of their father. (bl)he who has ears let him hear. “the kingdom of heaven (bm)is like treasure hidden in a field which a man found and covered up. then in his joy (bn)he goes and sells all that he has and (bo)buys that field. “again the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine pearls  who on finding (bp)one pearl of great value (bq)went and sold all that he had and (br)bought it. “again the kingdom of heaven is (bs)like a net that was thrown into the sea and (bt)gathered fish of every kind.  when it was full (bu)men drew it ashore and sat down and sorted the good into containers but threw away the bad.  so it will be at (bv)the end of the age. the angels will come out and (bw)separate the evil from the righteous  (bx)and throw them into the fiery furnace. in that place (by)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (bz)“have you understood all these things?” they said to him “yes.”  and he said to them “therefore every (ca)scribe (cb)who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who (cc)brings out of his treasure what is new and what is old.” and when jesus had finished these parables he went away from there  (cd)and coming to (ce)his hometown (cf)he taught them in their synagogue so that (cg)they were astonished and said “where did this man get this wisdom and these mighty works?  (ch)is not this (ci)the carpenter's son? is not his mother called mary? and are not (cj)his brothers james and joseph and simon and judas?  and are not all his sisters with us? where then did this man get all these things?”  and (ck)they took offense at him. but jesus said to them (cl)“a prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own household.”  and he did not do many mighty works there (cm)because of their unbelief. (a)at that time (b)herod the tetrarch heard about the fame of jesus  and he said to his servants (c)“this is john the baptist. he has been raised from the dead that is why these miraculous powers are at work in him.”  for (d)herod had seized john and bound him and (e)put him in prison for the sake of herodias his brother philip's wife[a]  because john had been saying to him (f)“it is not lawful for you to have her.”  and though he wanted to put him to death (g)he feared the people because they held him to be (h)a prophet.  but when herod's (i)birthday came the daughter of herodias danced before the company and pleased herod  so that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask.  prompted by her mother she said “give me the head of john the baptist here on a platter.”  and the king was sorry but because of his oaths and his guests he commanded it to be given.  he sent and had john beheaded in the prison  and his head was brought on a platter and given to the girl and she brought it to her mother.  and (j)his disciples came and took the body and buried it and they went and told jesus. now when jesus heard this (k)he withdrew from there in a boat to a desolate place by himself. but when the crowds heard it they followed him on foot from the towns.  when he went ashore he (l)saw a great crowd and (m)he had compassion on them and healed their sick.  now when it was evening the disciples came to him and said “this is a desolate place and the day is now over (n)send the crowds away to go into the villages and buy food for themselves.”  but jesus said “they need not go away (o)you give them something to eat.”  they said to him “we have only five loaves here and two fish.”  and he said “bring them here to me.”  then he ordered the crowds to sit down on the grass and taking the five loaves and the two fish (p)he looked up to heaven and (q)said a blessing. then he broke the loaves and gave them to the disciples and the disciples gave them to the crowds.  and they all ate and were satisfied. and they took up twelve baskets full of the broken pieces left over.  and those who ate were about five thousand men besides women and children. (r)immediately he (s)made the disciples get into the boat and go before him to the other side while he dismissed the crowds.  and after he had dismissed the crowds (t)he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. when (u)evening came he was there alone  but the boat by this time was a long way[b] from the land[c] beaten by the waves for the wind was against them.  and (v)in the fourth watch of the night[d] he came to them walking on the sea.  but when the disciples saw him walking on the sea (w)they were terrified and said “it is a ghost!” and they cried out in fear.  but immediately jesus spoke to them saying (x)“take heart it is i. (y)do not be afraid.” and peter answered him “lord if it is you command me to come to you on the water.”  he said “come.” so peter got out of the boat and (z)walked on the water and came to jesus.  but when he saw the wind[e] he was afraid and beginning to sink he cried out (aa)“lord save me.”  jesus immediately reached out his hand and took hold of him saying to him (ab)“o you of little faith why did you (ac)doubt?”  and when they got into the boat (ad)the wind ceased.  and (ae)those in the boat (af)worshiped him saying (ag)“truly you are (ah)the son of god.” (ai)and when they had crossed over they came to land at (aj)gennesaret.  and when the men of that place recognized him they sent around to all that region and (ak)brought to him all who were sick  and implored him that they might only touch (al)the fringe of his garment. and (am)as many as touched it were made well. (a)then pharisees and (b)scribes came to jesus (c)from jerusalem and said  (d)“why do your disciples break (e)the tradition of the elders? (f)for they do not wash their hands when they eat.”  he answered them “and why do you break the commandment of god for the sake of your tradition?  for god commanded (g)‘honor your father and your mother’ and (h)‘whoever reviles father or mother must surely die.’  but you say ‘if anyone tells his father or his mother “what you would have gained from me is given to god”[a]  he need not honor his father.’ so for the sake of your tradition you have (i)made void the word[b] of god.  (j)you hypocrites! well did isaiah prophesy of you when he said (k)“‘this people honors me with their lips    but their heart is far from me in vain do they worship me    teaching as (l)doctrines the commandments of men.’” and he called the people to him and said to them (m)“hear and understand  (n)it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person but what comes out of the mouth this defiles a person.”  then the disciples came and said to him “do you know that the pharisees were (o)offended when they heard this saying?”  he answered (p)“every plant that my heavenly father has not planted (q)will be rooted up.  let them alone (r)they are blind guides.[c] and (s)if the blind lead the blind both will fall into a pit.”  but peter said to him (t)“explain the parable to us.”  and he said (u)“are you also still without understanding?  do you not see that (v)whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled?[d]  but (w)what comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart and this defiles a person.  for out of the heart come (x)evil thoughts (y)murder adultery sexual immorality theft false witness (z)slander.  (aa)these are what defile a person. but (ab)to eat with unwashed hands does not defile anyone.” (ac)and jesus went away from there and withdrew to the district of tyre and sidon.  and behold (ad)a canaanite woman from that region came out and was crying (ae)“have mercy on me o lord son of david my daughter is severely oppressed by a demon.”  but he did not answer her a word. and his disciples came and begged him saying (af)“send her away for she is crying out after us.”  he answered (ag)“i was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of israel.”  but she came and (ah)knelt before him saying “lord help me.”  and he answered “it is not right to take the children's bread and (ai)throw it to the dogs.”  she said “yes lord yet even the dogs eat (aj)the crumbs that fall from their masters' table.”  then jesus answered her “o woman (ak)great is your faith! (al)be it done for you as you desire.” (am)and her daughter was (an)healed instantly.[e] (ao)jesus went on from there and walked (ap)beside the sea of galilee. and he (aq)went up on the mountain and sat down there.  and great crowds came to him bringing with them (ar)the lame the blind the crippled the mute and many others and they put them at his feet and he healed them  (as)so that the crowd wondered when they saw the mute speaking (at)the crippled healthy the lame walking and the blind seeing. and (au)they glorified (av)the god of israel. (aw)then jesus called his disciples to him and said (ax)“i have compassion on the crowd because they have been with me now three days and have nothing to eat. and i am unwilling to send them away hungry lest they faint on the way.”  and the disciples said to him “where are we to get enough bread in such a desolate place to feed so great a crowd?”  and jesus said to them “how many loaves do you have?” they said (ay)“seven and a few small fish.”  and directing the crowd to sit down on the ground  he took the seven loaves and the fish and (az)having given thanks he broke them and gave them to the disciples and the disciples gave them to the crowds.  and (ba)they all ate and were satisfied. and they took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces left over.  those who ate were four thousand men besides women and children.  and after sending away the crowds he got into the boat and went to the region of (bb)magadan. (a)and the pharisees and sadducees came and (b)to test him (c)they asked him to show them (d)a sign from heaven.  he answered them[a] (e)“when it is evening you say ‘it will be fair weather for the sky is red.’  and in the morning ‘it will be stormy today for the sky is red and threatening.’ (f)you know how to interpret the appearance of the sky but you cannot interpret (g)the signs of the times.  (h)an evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign but no sign will be given to it except the sign of jonah.” so (i)he left them and departed. when the disciples reached the other side they had forgotten to bring any bread.  jesus said to them “watch and (j)beware of (k)the leaven of the pharisees and sadducees.”  and they began discussing it among themselves saying “we brought no bread.”  but (l)jesus aware of this said (m)“o you of little faith why are you discussing among yourselves the fact that you have no bread?  (n)do you not yet perceive? do you not remember (o)the five loaves for the five thousand and how many baskets you gathered?  or (p)the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you gathered?  how is it that you fail to understand that i did not speak about bread? (q)beware of the leaven of the pharisees and sadducees.”  (r)then they understood that he did not tell them to beware of the leaven of bread but of (s)the teaching of the pharisees and sadducees. (t)now when jesus came into the district of caesarea philippi he asked his disciples “who do people say that the son of man is?”  and they said “some say (u)john the baptist others say (v)elijah and others jeremiah or one of the prophets.”  he said to them “but who do you say that i am?”  simon peter replied (w)“you are (x)the christ (y)the son of (z)the living god.”  and jesus answered him (aa)“blessed are you (ab)simon barjonah! for (ac)flesh and blood has not revealed this to you (ad)but my father who is in heaven.  and i tell you (ae)you are peter and (af)on this rock[b] i will build my church and (ag)the gates of (ah)hell[c] shall not prevail against it.  i will give you (ai)the keys of the kingdom of heaven and (aj)whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed[d] in heaven.”  (ak)then he strictly charged the disciples to tell no one that he was the christ. (al)from that time jesus began to show his disciples that (am)he must go to jerusalem and (an)suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed and on (ao)the third day be raised.  and peter took him aside and began to rebuke him saying “far be it from you lord![e] this shall never happen to you.”  but he turned and said to peter (ap)“get behind me satan! you are (aq)a hindrance[f] to me. for you (ar)are not setting your mind on the things of god but on the things of man.” then jesus told his disciples “if anyone would come after me let him (as)deny himself and (at)take up his cross and follow me.  for (au)whoever would save his life[g] will lose it but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.  for (av)what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world and forfeits his soul? or (aw)what shall a man give in return for his soul?  (ax)for the son of man is going to come with (ay)his angels in the glory of his father and (az)then he will repay each person according to what he has done.  truly i say to you there are some standing here who will not (ba)taste death (bb)until they see the son of man (bc)coming in his kingdom.” (a)and after six days jesus took with him (b)peter and james and john his brother and led them up a high mountain by themselves.  and he was (c)transfigured before them and (d)his face shone like the sun and (e)his clothes became white as light.  and behold there appeared to them moses and elijah talking with him.  and peter said to jesus “lord it is good that we are here. if you wish i will make three tents here one for you and one for moses and one for (f)elijah.”  he was still speaking when behold (g)a bright cloud overshadowed them and (h)a voice from the cloud said (i)“this is my beloved son[a] with whom i am well pleased (j)listen to him.”  when (k)the disciples heard this (l)they fell on their faces and were terrified.  but jesus came and (m)touched them saying “rise and (n)have no fear.”  and when they lifted up their eyes they saw no one but jesus only. (o)and as they were coming down the mountain jesus commanded them (p)“tell no one the vision until the son of man is raised from the dead.”  and the disciples asked him “then why do the scribes say (q)that first elijah must come?”  he answered “elijah does come and (r)he will restore all things.  but i tell you that elijah has already come and they did not recognize him but (s)did to him whatever they pleased. (t)so also the son of man will certainly suffer at their hands.”  (u)then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them of john the baptist. (v)and when they came to the crowd a man came up to him and kneeling before him  said “lord have mercy on my son for he has (w)seizures and he suffers terribly. for often he falls into the fire and often into the water.  and i brought him to your disciples and (x)they could not heal him.”  and jesus answered “o faithless and (y)twisted generation how long am i to be with you? (z)how long am i to bear with you? bring him here to me.”  and jesus (aa)rebuked the demon[b] and it[c] came out of him and (ab)the boy was healed instantly.[d]  then the disciples came to jesus privately and said “why could we not cast it out?”  he said to them (ac)“because of your little faith. for (ad)truly i say to you (ae)if you have faith like a grain of mustard seed (af)you will say to this mountain ‘move from here to there’ and it will move and (ag)nothing will be impossible for you.”[e] (ah)as they were gathering[f] in galilee jesus said to them “the son of man is about to be delivered into the hands of men  and they will kill him and he will be raised on (ai)the third day.” and they were greatly distressed. (aj)when they came to capernaum the collectors of (ak)the twodrachma tax went up to peter and said “does your teacher not pay the tax?”  he said “yes.” and when he came into the house jesus spoke to him first saying (al)“what do you think simon? from whom do kings of the earth take toll or (am)tax? from their sons or from others?”  and when he said “from others” jesus said to him “then the sons are free.  however not to give offense to them go to the sea and cast a hook and take the first fish that comes up and when you open its mouth you will find a shekel.[g] take that and give it to them for me and for yourself.” (a)at that time the disciples came to jesus saying “who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”  and calling to him a child he put him in the midst of them  and said “truly i say to you unless you (b)turn and (c)become like children you (d)will never enter the kingdom of heaven.  (e)whoever humbles himself like this child is the (f)greatest in the kingdom of heaven. (g)“whoever receives one such child in my name receives me  but (h)whoever causes one of these (i)little ones who believe in me to sin[a] it would be better for him to have a great millstone fastened around his neck and to be drowned in the depth of the sea. “woe to the world for (j)temptations to sin![b] (k)for it is necessary that temptations come (l)but woe to the one by whom the temptation comes!  (m)and if your hand or your foot causes you to sin cut it off and throw it away. it is better for you to enter life crippled or lame than with two hands or two feet to be thrown into (n)the eternal fire.  (o)and if your eye causes you to sin tear it out and throw it away. it is better for you to enter life with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into the (p)hell[c] of fire. “see that you do not despise (q)one of these little ones. for i tell you that in heaven (r)their angels always (s)see the face of my father who is in heaven.[d]  (t)what do you think? (u)if a man has a hundred sheep and one of them has gone astray does he not leave the ninetynine on the mountains and go in search of the one that went astray?  and if he finds it truly i say to you he rejoices over it more than over the ninetynine that never went astray.  so (v)it is not the will of my[e] father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish. (w)“if your brother sins against you (x)go and tell him his fault between you and him alone. if he listens to you you have (y)gained your brother.  but if he does not listen take one or two others along with you that every charge may be established (z)by the evidence of two or three witnesses.  if he refuses to listen to them (aa)tell it to the church. and if he refuses to listen even to the church (ab)let him be to you as (ac)a gentile and (ad)a tax collector.  truly i say to you (ae)whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed[f] in heaven.  again i say to you if two of you (af)agree on earth about anything they ask (ag)it will be done for them by my father in heaven.  for where two or three are (ah)gathered in my name (ai)there am i among them.” then peter came up and said to him “lord how often (aj)will my brother sin against me and i forgive him? (ak)as many as seven times?”  jesus said to him “i do not say to you seven times but seventyseven times. “therefore the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished (al)to settle accounts with his servants.[g]  when he began to settle one was brought to him who owed him (am)ten thousand (an)talents.[h]  (ao)and since he could not pay his master ordered him (ap)to be sold with his wife and (aq)children and all that he had and payment to be made.  so the servant[i] (ar)fell on his knees imploring him ‘have patience with me and i will pay you everything.’  and out of pity for him the master of that servant released him and (as)forgave him the debt.  but when that same servant went out he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred (at)denarii[j] and seizing him he began to choke him saying ‘pay what you owe.’  so his fellow servant fell down and pleaded with him ‘have patience with me and i will pay you.’  he refused and went and put him in prison until he should pay the debt.  when his fellow servants saw what had taken place they were greatly distressed and they went and reported to their master all that had taken place.  then his master summoned him and said to him ‘you wicked servant! i forgave you all that debt because you pleaded with me.  (au)and should not you have had mercy on your fellow servant as i had mercy on you?’  (av)and in anger his master delivered him to the jailers[k] (aw)until he should pay all his debt.  (ax)so also my heavenly father will do to every one of you if you do not forgive your brother (ay)from your heart.” now when jesus had finished these sayings he went away from (a)galilee and (b)entered (c)the region of judea beyond the jordan.  and (d)large crowds followed him and he healed them there. and pharisees came up to him and (e)tested him by asking (f)“is it lawful to divorce one's wife for any cause?”  he answered (g)“have you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female  and said (h)‘therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife and (i)the two shall become one flesh’?  so they are no longer two but one flesh. (j)what therefore god has joined together let not man separate.”  they said to him (k)“why then did moses command one to give a certificate of divorce and to send her away?”  he said to them “because of your (l)hardness of heart moses allowed you to divorce your wives but from the beginning it was not so.  (m)and i say to you whoever divorces his wife except for sexual immorality and marries another commits adultery.”[a] the disciples said to him “if such is the case of a man with his wife it is better not to marry.”  but he said to them (n)“not everyone can receive this saying but only (o)those to (p)whom it is given.  for there are eunuchs who have been so from birth and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by men and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs (q)for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. let the one who is able to receive this receive it.” (r)then children were brought to him that he might lay his hands on them and pray. the disciples (s)rebuked the people  but jesus said (t)“let the little children (u)come to me and do not hinder them for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven.”  and he laid his hands on them and went away. (v)and behold a man came up to him saying “teacher what good deed must i do to (w)have (x)eternal life?”  and he said to him “why do you ask me about what is good? there is only one who is good. (y)if you would enter life keep the commandments.”  he said to him “which ones?” and jesus said (z)“you shall not murder you shall not commit adultery you shall not steal you shall not bear false witness  honor your father and mother and (aa)you shall love your neighbor as yourself.”  the young man said to him (ab)“all these i have kept. what do i still lack?”  jesus said to him “if you would be (ac)perfect go (ad)sell what you possess and give to the poor and you will have (ae)treasure in heaven and come follow me.”  (af)when the young man heard this he went away sorrowful for he had great possessions. and jesus said to his disciples “truly i say to you (ag)only with difficulty will a rich person enter the kingdom of heaven.  (ah)again i tell you it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter (ai)the kingdom of god.”  when the disciples heard this they were greatly astonished saying “who then can be saved?”  but jesus (aj)looked at them and said (ak)“with man this is impossible but with god all things are possible.”  then peter said in reply “see (al)we have left everything and followed you. what then will we have?”  jesus said to them “truly i say to you in the new world[b] (am)when the son of man will sit on his glorious throne you who have followed me (an)will also sit on twelve thrones (ao)judging the twelve tribes of israel.  (ap)and everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for my name's sake will receive a hundredfold[c] and will (aq)inherit eternal life.  but (ar)many who are (as)first will be last and the last first. “for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.  after agreeing with the laborers for a denarius[a] a day he sent them into his vineyard.  and going out about the third hour he saw others standing idle in the marketplace  and to them he said ‘you go into the vineyard too and whatever is right i will give you.’  so they went. going out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour he did the same.  and (a)about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing. and he said to them ‘why do you stand here idle all day?’  they said to him ‘because no one has hired us.’ he said to them ‘you go into the vineyard too.’  and (b)when evening came the owner of the vineyard said to his (c)foreman ‘call the laborers and pay them their wages beginning with the last up to the first.’  and when those hired about the eleventh hour came each of them received a denarius.  now when those hired first came they thought they would receive more but each of them also received a denarius.  and on receiving it they grumbled at the master of the house  saying ‘these last worked only one hour and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the day and (d)the scorching heat.’  but he replied to one of them (e)‘friend i am doing you no wrong. did you not agree with me for a denarius?  take (f)what belongs to you and go. i choose to give to this last worker as i give to you.  (g)am i not allowed to do what i choose with what belongs to me? or (h)do you begrudge my generosity?’[b]  so (i)the last will be first and the first last.” (j)and as jesus was going up to jerusalem he took the twelve disciples aside and on the way he said to them  “see (k)we are going up to jerusalem. and the son of man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes and they will (l)condemn him to death  and (m)deliver him over to the gentiles (n)to be mocked and flogged and (o)crucified and he will be raised on (p)the third day.” (q)then (r)the mother of the sons of zebedee came up to him with her sons and (s)kneeling before him she asked him for something.  and he said to her “what do you want?” she said to him “say that these two sons of mine (t)are to sit one at your right hand and one at your left (u)in your kingdom.”  jesus answered (v)“you do not know what you are asking. are you able (w)to drink the cup that i am to drink?” they said to him “we are able.”  he said to them (x)“you will drink (y)my cup but to sit at my right hand and at my left is not mine to grant (z)but it is for those for whom it has been (aa)prepared by my father.”  and when the ten heard it they were indignant at the two brothers.  but jesus called them to him and said (ab)“you know that the rulers of the gentiles (ac)lord it over them and their great ones exercise authority over them.  (ad)it shall not be so among you. but whoever would be great among you must be your servant[c]  and whoever would be first among you must be your slave[d]  even as the son of man came not to be served but (ae)to serve and (af)to give his life as a ransom for (ag)many.” (ah)and as they went out of jericho a great crowd followed him.  and behold there were two blind men sitting by the roadside and when they heard that jesus was passing by they cried out “lord[e] have mercy on us (ai)son of david!”  the crowd (aj)rebuked them telling them to be silent but they cried out all the more “lord have mercy on us son of david!”  and stopping jesus called them and said “what do you want me to do for you?”  they said to him “lord let our eyes be opened.”  and jesus in pity touched their eyes and immediately they recovered their sight and followed him. (a)now when they drew near to jerusalem and came to bethphage to (b)the mount of olives then jesus (c)sent two disciples  saying to them “go into the village in front of you and immediately you will find a donkey tied and a colt with her. untie them and bring them to me.  if anyone says anything to you you shall say ‘the lord needs them’ and he will send them at once.”  this took place (d)to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet saying (e)“say to the daughter of zion‘behold your king is coming to you    (f)humble and mounted on a donkey    on a colt[a] the foal of a beast of burden.’” the disciples went and did as jesus had directed them.  they brought the donkey and the colt and put on them their cloaks and he sat on them.  most of the crowd (g)spread their cloaks on the road and others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.  and the crowds that went before him and that followed him were shouting (h)“hosanna to (i)the son of david! (j)blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord! hosanna (k)in the highest!”  and (l)when he entered jerusalem the whole city was stirred up saying “who is this?”  and the crowds said “this is (m)the prophet jesus (n)from nazareth of galilee.” (o)and jesus entered the temple[b] and drove out all who sold and bought in the temple and he overturned the tables of (p)the moneychangers and the seats of those who sold (q)pigeons.  he said to them “it is written (r)‘my house shall be called a house of prayer’ but (s)you make it a den of robbers.” (t)and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple and he healed them.  (u)but when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did and the children crying out in the temple (v)“hosanna to the son of david!” they were indignant  and they said to him “do you hear what these are saying?” and jesus said to them “yes (w)have you never read (x)“‘out of the mouth of (y)infants and nursing babies    you have prepared praise’?” and (z)leaving them he (aa)went out of the city to (ab)bethany and lodged there. (ac)in the morning as he was returning to the city (ad)he became hungry.  (ae)and seeing a fig tree by the wayside he went to it and found nothing on it but only leaves. and he said to it “may no fruit ever come from you again!” and the fig tree withered at once. when the disciples saw it they marveled saying “how did the fig tree wither at once?”  and jesus answered them (af)“truly i say to you (ag)if you have faith and (ah)do not doubt you will not only do what has been done to the fig tree but even if you say to this mountain (ai)‘be taken up and thrown into the sea’ it will happen.  and (aj)whatever you ask in prayer you will receive (ak)if you have faith.” (al)and when he entered the temple the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him (am)as he was teaching and said (an)“by what authority are you doing these things and who gave you this authority?”  jesus answered them “i also will ask you one question and if you tell me the answer then i also will tell you by what authority i do these things.  the baptism of john (ao)from where did it come? (ap)from heaven or from man?” and they discussed it among themselves saying “if we say ‘from heaven’ he will say to us (aq)‘why then did you not believe him?’  but if we say ‘from man’ (ar)we are afraid of the crowd for they all hold that john was (as)a prophet.”  so they answered jesus “we do not know.” and he said to them “neither will i tell you by what authority i do these things. (at)“what do you think? a man had two sons. and he went to the first and said ‘son go and work in (au)the vineyard today.’  and he answered ‘i will not’ but afterward he (av)changed his mind and went.  and he went to the other son and said the same. and he answered ‘i go sir’ but did not go.  which of the two did the will of his father?” they said “the first.” jesus said to them “truly i say to you (aw)the tax collectors and (ax)the prostitutes go into (ay)the kingdom of god before you.  for john came to you (az)in the way of righteousness and (ba)you did not believe him but (bb)the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. and even when you saw it you did not afterward (bc)change your minds and believe him. (bd)“hear another parable. there was a master of a house who planted (be)a vineyard (bf)and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and built a tower and (bg)leased it to tenants and (bh)went into another country.  when the season for fruit drew near he sent his servants[c] to the tenants (bi)to get his fruit.  (bj)and the tenants took his servants and beat one killed another and (bk)stoned another.  (bl)again he sent other servants more than the first. and they did the same to them.  finally he sent his son to them saying ‘they will respect my son.’  but when the tenants saw the son they said to themselves (bm)‘this is the heir. come (bn)let us kill him and have his inheritance.’  and they took him and (bo)threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.  (bp)when therefore the owner of the vineyard comes what will he do to those tenants?”  they said to him (bq)“he will put those wretches to a miserable death and (br)let out the vineyard to other tenants who will give him the fruits in their seasons.” jesus said to them (bs)“have you never read in the scriptures (bt)“‘the stone that the builders rejected    has become the cornerstone[d]this was the lord's doing    and it is marvelous in our eyes’? therefore i tell you the kingdom of god (bu)will be taken away from you and given to a people (bv)producing its fruits.  and (bw)the one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces and (bx)when it falls on anyone it will crush him.”[e] when the chief priests and the pharisees heard his parables they perceived that he was speaking about them.  and (by)although they were seeking to arrest him (bz)they feared the crowds because they held him to be (ca)a prophet. and again jesus (a)spoke to them in parables saying  (b)“the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who gave (c)a wedding feast for his son  and (d)sent his servants[a] to call those who were invited to the wedding feast but they would not come.  (e)again he sent other servants saying ‘tell those who are invited “see i have prepared my (f)dinner (g)my oxen and my fat calves have been slaughtered and everything is ready. come to the wedding feast.”’  but (h)they paid no attention and went off one to his farm another to his business  while the rest seized his servants (i)treated them shamefully and (j)killed them.  the king was angry and he sent his troops and (k)destroyed those murderers and burned their city.  then he said to his servants ‘the wedding feast is ready but those invited were not (l)worthy.  go therefore to the main roads and invite to the wedding feast as many as you find.’  and those servants went out into the roads and (m)gathered all whom they found both bad and good. so the wedding hall was filled with guests. “but when the king came in to look at the guests he saw there (n)a man who had no wedding garment.  and he said to him (o)‘friend how did you get in here without a wedding garment?’ and he was speechless.  then the king said to the attendants ‘bind him hand and foot and (p)cast him into the outer darkness. in that place (q)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’  for many are (r)called but few are (s)chosen.” (t)then the pharisees went and plotted how (u)to entangle him in his words.  and they sent (v)their disciples to him along with (w)the herodians saying “teacher (x)we know that you are true and teach (y)the way of god truthfully and you do not care about anyone's opinion for (z)you are not swayed by appearances.[b]  tell us then what you think. is it lawful to pay (aa)taxes to (ab)caesar or not?”  but jesus aware of their malice said “why (ac)put me to the test you hypocrites?  show me the coin for the tax.” and they brought him a denarius.[c]  and jesus said to them “whose likeness and inscription is this?”  they said “caesar's.” then he said to them (ad)“therefore render to caesar the things that are caesar's and to god the things that are god's.”  when they heard it they marveled. and they (ae)left him and went away. the same day (af)sadducees came to him (ag)who say that there is no resurrection and they asked him a question  saying “teacher moses said (ah)‘if a man dies having no children his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.’  now there were seven brothers among us. the first married and died and having no offspring left his wife to his brother.  so too the second and third down to the seventh.  after them all the woman died.  in the resurrection therefore of the seven whose wife will she be? for they all had her.” but jesus answered them “you are wrong (ai)because you know neither the scriptures nor (aj)the power of god.  for in the resurrection they neither (ak)marry nor (al)are given in marriage but are like angels in heaven.  and as for the resurrection of the dead (am)have you not read what was said to you by god  (an)‘i am the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob’? he is not god of the dead but of the living.”  and when the crowd heard it (ao)they were astonished at his teaching. (ap)but when the pharisees heard that he had silenced (aq)the sadducees they gathered together.  (ar)and one of them (as)a lawyer asked him a question (at)to test him.  “teacher which is the great commandment in the law?”  and he said to him (au)“you shall love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.  this is the great and first commandment.  and (av)a second is like it (aw)you shall love your neighbor as yourself.  (ax)on these two commandments depend (ay)all the law and the prophets.” (az)now while the pharisees (ba)were gathered together jesus asked them a question  saying “what do you think about (bb)the christ? whose son is he?” they said to him (bc)“the son of david.”  he said to them “how is it then that david (bd)in the spirit calls him lord saying (be)“‘the lord said to my lord“sit at my right hand    until i put your enemies under your feet”’? if then david calls him lord (bf)how is he his son?”  (bg)and no one was able to answer him a word (bh)nor from that day did anyone dare to ask him any more questions. then jesus (a)said to the crowds and to his disciples  (b)“the scribes and the pharisees (c)sit on moses' seat  so do and observe whatever they tell you (d)but not the works they do. (e)for they preach but do not practice.  (f)they tie up heavy burdens hard to bear[a] and lay them on people's shoulders but they themselves are not willing to move them with their finger.  (g)they do all their deeds (h)to be seen by others. for they make (i)their phylacteries broad and (j)their fringes long  and they (k)love the place of honor at feasts and (l)the best seats in the synagogues  and (m)greetings in (n)the marketplaces and being called (o)rabbi[b] by others.  (p)but you are not to be called rabbi for you have one teacher and you are (q)all brothers.[c]  (r)and call no man your father on earth for (s)you have one father who is in heaven.  neither be called instructors for you have one instructor (t)the christ.  (u)the greatest among you shall be your servant.  (v)whoever exalts himself will be humbled and whoever humbles himself will be exalted. “but woe (w)to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for you (x)shut the kingdom of heaven in people's faces. for you (y)neither enter yourselves nor allow those who would enter to go in.[d]  woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for you travel across sea and land to make a single (z)proselyte and when he becomes a proselyte you make him twice as much a (aa)child of (ab)hell[e] as yourselves. “woe to (ac)you (ad)blind guides who say (ae)‘if anyone swears by the temple it is nothing but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple he is bound by his oath.’  you blind fools! for which is greater the gold or (af)the temple that has made the gold sacred?  and you say ‘if anyone swears by the altar it is nothing but if anyone swears by (ag)the gift that is on the altar he is bound by his oath.’  you blind men! for which is greater the gift or (ah)the altar that makes the gift sacred?  so whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.  and whoever swears by the temple swears by it and by (ai)him who dwells in it.  and whoever swears by (aj)heaven swears by (ak)the throne of god and by (al)him who sits upon it. (am)“woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for (an)you tithe mint and dill and (ao)cumin and have neglected the weightier matters of the law (ap)justice and mercy and faithfulness. (aq)these you ought to have done without neglecting the others.  you blind guides straining out a gnat and swallowing (ar)a camel! (as)“woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for (at)you clean the outside of (au)the cup and the plate but inside they are full of (av)greed and selfindulgence.  you blind pharisee! first clean the inside of (aw)the cup and the plate that the outside also may be clean. (ax)“woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for you are like (ay)whitewashed tombs which outwardly appear beautiful but within are full of dead people's bones and (az)all uncleanness.  so you also (ba)outwardly appear righteous to others but within you are full of (bb)hypocrisy and lawlessness. (bc)“woe to you scribes and pharisees hypocrites! for you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the monuments of the righteous  saying ‘if we had lived in the days of our fathers we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’  thus you witness against yourselves that you are (bd)sons of those who murdered the prophets.  (be)fill up then the measure of your fathers.  you serpents (bf)you brood of vipers how are you to escape being sentenced to (bg)hell?  (bh)therefore (bi)i send you (bj)prophets and wise men and (bk)scribes (bl)some of whom you will kill and crucify and (bm)some you will (bn)flog in your synagogues and (bo)persecute from town to town  so that on you may come all (bp)the righteous blood shed on earth from the blood of righteous (bq)abel to the blood of (br)zechariah the son of barachiah[f] whom you murdered between (bs)the sanctuary and (bt)the altar.  truly i say to you (bu)all these things will come upon this generation. (bv)“o jerusalem jerusalem the city that (bw)kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! how often would i have (bx)gathered (by)your children together (bz)as a hen gathers her brood (ca)under her wings and (cb)you were not willing!  see (cc)your house is left to you desolate.  for i tell you you will not see me again until you say (cd)‘blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord.’” (a)jesus left the temple and was going away when his disciples came to point out to him the buildings of the temple.  but he answered them “you see all these do you not? truly i say to you (b)there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.” as he sat on (c)the mount of olives the disciples came to him (d)privately saying “tell us (e)when will these things be and what will be the sign of your (f)coming and of (g)the end of the age?”  and jesus answered them (h)“see that no one leads you astray.  for (i)many will come in my name saying ‘i am (j)the christ’ and they will lead many astray.  and you will hear of wars and rumors of wars. see that you (k)are not alarmed for this (l)must take place but the end is not yet.  for (m)nation will rise against nation and (n)kingdom against kingdom and there will be (o)famines and earthquakes in various places.  all these are but the beginning of (p)the birth pains. “then (q)they will deliver you up (r)to tribulation and (s)put you to death and (t)you will be hated by all nations for my name's sake.  and then many will fall away[a] and (u)betray one another and hate one another.  and many (v)false prophets will arise (w)and lead many astray.  and because lawlessness will be increased (x)the love of many will grow cold.  (y)but the one who endures to the end will be saved.  and this gospel of the kingdom (z)will be proclaimed throughout the whole world (aa)as a testimony (ab)to all nations and (ac)then the end will come. “so when you see the abomination of desolation (ad)spoken of by the prophet daniel standing in (ae)the holy place ((af)let the reader understand)  then let those who are in judea flee to the mountains.  (ag)let the one who is on (ah)the housetop not go down to take what is in his house  and let the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak.  and (ai)alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days!  pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a sabbath.  for then there will be (aj)great tribulation (ak)such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now no and never will be.  and if those days had not been cut short no human being would be saved. but for (al)the sake of the elect those days will be cut short.  (am)then if anyone says to you ‘look here is the christ!’ or ‘there he is!’ do not believe it.  for (an)false christs and (ao)false prophets will arise and (ap)perform great signs and wonders (aq)so as to lead astray if possible even the elect.  see (ar)i have told you beforehand.  so if they say to you ‘look (as)he is in the wilderness’ do not go out. if they say ‘look he is in the inner rooms’ do not believe it.  (at)for as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far as the west so will be (au)the coming of the son of man.  (av)wherever the corpse is there the vultures will gather. “immediately after (aw)the tribulation of those days (ax)the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light and (ay)the stars will fall from heaven and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.  then (az)will appear in heaven (ba)the sign of the son of man and then (bb)all the tribes of the earth will mourn and (bc)they will see the son of man coming on the clouds of heaven (bd)with power and great glory.  and (be)he will send out his angels with a loud (bf)trumpet call and they will (bg)gather (bh)his elect from (bi)the four winds (bj)from one end of heaven to the other. “from the fig tree learn its lesson as soon as its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves you know that summer is near.  so also when you see all these things you know that he is near (bk)at the very gates.  (bl)truly i say to you this generation will not pass away until all these things take place.  (bm)heaven and earth will pass away but (bn)my words will not pass away. “but concerning that day and hour (bo)no one knows not even the angels of heaven (bp)nor the son[b] (bq)but the father only.  (br)for as were the days of noah (bs)so will be the coming of the son of man.  (bt)for as in those days before the flood they were eating and drinking (bu)marrying and giving in marriage until (bv)the day when noah entered the ark  and they were unaware until the flood came and swept them all away (bw)so will be the coming of the son of man.  then two men will be in the field one will be taken and one left.  (bx)two women will be grinding (by)at the mill one will be taken and one left.  therefore (bz)stay awake for you do not know on what day (ca)your lord is coming.  (cb)but know this that if the master of the house had known in what part of the night (cc)the thief was coming he would have stayed awake and would not have let his house be broken into.  therefore you also must be (cd)ready for (ce)the son of man is coming at an hour you do not expect. “who then is (cf)the faithful and (cg)wise servant[c] whom his master has set over his household to give them their food at the proper time?  (ch)blessed is that servant whom his master will find so doing when he comes.  truly i say to you (ci)he will set him over all his possessions.  but if that wicked servant says to himself ‘my master (cj)is delayed’  and begins to beat his fellow servants[d] and eats and drinks with (ck)drunkards  the master of that servant will come (cl)on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not know  and will cut him in pieces and put him with the hypocrites. in that place (cm)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. “then the kingdom of heaven will be like (a)ten virgins who took their lamps[a] and went to meet (b)the bridegroom.[b]  five of them were foolish and five were (c)wise.  for when the foolish took their lamps they took no oil with them  but the wise took flasks of oil with their lamps.  as the bridegroom (d)was delayed they all became drowsy and slept.  but (e)at midnight there was a cry ‘here is the bridegroom! come out to meet him.’  then all those virgins rose and (f)trimmed their lamps.  and the foolish said to the wise ‘give us some of your oil for our lamps are going out.’  but the wise answered saying ‘since there will not be enough for us and for you go rather to the dealers and buy for yourselves.’  and while they were going to buy the bridegroom came and (g)those who were ready went in with him to (h)the marriage feast and (i)the door was shut.  afterward the other virgins came also saying (j)‘lord lord open to us.’  (k)but he answered ‘truly i say to you (l)i do not know you.’  (m)watch therefore for you (n)know neither the day nor the hour. (o)“for (p)it will be like a man (q)going on a journey who called his servants[c] and entrusted to them his property.  to one he gave five (r)talents[d] to another two to another one (s)to each according to his ability. then he (t)went away.  he who had received the five talents went at once and traded with them and he made five talents more.  so also he who had the two talents made two talents more.  but he who had received the one talent went and (u)dug in the ground and hid his master's money.  now (v)after a long time the master of those servants came and (w)settled accounts with them.  and he who had received the five talents came forward bringing five talents more saying ‘master you delivered to me five talents here i have made five talents more.’  his master said to him ‘well done good and (x)faithful servant.[e] (y)you have been faithful over a little (z)i will set you over much. enter into (aa)the joy of your master.’  and he also who had the two talents came forward saying ‘master you delivered to me two talents here i have made two talents more.’  his master said to him ‘well done good and faithful servant. you have been faithful over a little i will set you over much. enter into the joy of your master.’  he also who had received the one talent came forward saying ‘master i knew you to be (ab)a hard man reaping (ac)where you did not sow and gathering where you scattered no seed  so i was afraid and i went and hid your talent in the ground. here (ad)you have what is yours.’  but his master answered him ‘you (ae)wicked and (af)slothful servant! you knew that i reap where i have not sown and gather where i scattered no seed?  then you ought to have invested my money with the bankers and at my coming i should have received what was my own with interest.  so take the talent from him and give it to him who has the ten talents.  (ag)for to everyone who has will more be given and he will have an abundance. but from the one who has not even what he has will be taken away.  and (ah)cast (ai)the worthless servant into the outer darkness. in that place (aj)there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ (ak)“when the son of man comes in his glory and all the angels with him (al)then he will sit on his glorious throne.  before him (am)will be gathered (an)all the nations and (ao)he will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates (ap)the sheep from the goats.  and he will place the sheep on his right but the goats on the left.  then (aq)the king will say to (ar)those on his right ‘come you (as)who are blessed by my father (at)inherit (au)the kingdom (av)prepared for you (aw)from the foundation of the world.  for (ax)i was hungry and you gave me food i was thirsty and you (ay)gave me drink (az)i was a stranger and you welcomed me  (ba)i was naked and you clothed me (bb)i was sick and you (bc)visited me (bd)i was in prison and you came to me.’  then the righteous will answer him saying ‘lord when did we see you hungry and feed you or thirsty and give you drink?  and when did we see you a stranger and welcome you or naked and clothe you?  and when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’  and (be)the king will answer them (bf)‘truly i say to you as you did it to one of the least of these (bg)my brothers[f] you did it to me.’ “then he will say to those on his left (bh)‘depart from me you (bi)cursed into (bj)the eternal fire prepared for (bk)the devil and his angels.  for (bl)i was hungry and you gave me no food i was thirsty and you gave me no drink  i was a stranger and you did not welcome me naked and you did not clothe me sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’  then they also will answer saying ‘lord when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’  then he will answer them saying ‘truly i say to you as you did not do it to one of the least of these (bm)you did not do it to me.’  and these will go away (bn)into eternal punishment but the righteous (bo)into (bp)eternal life.” when jesus had finished all these sayings he said to his disciples  (a)“you know that after two days (b)the passover is coming and (c)the son of man (d)will be delivered up to be crucified.” (e)then the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in (f)the palace of the high priest whose name was (g)caiaphas  (h)and plotted together in order to arrest jesus by stealth and kill him.  but they said “not during the feast (i)lest there be an uproar among the people.” (j)now when jesus was at (k)bethany in the house of simon the leper[a]  a woman came up to him with an alabaster flask of very expensive ointment and she poured it on his head as he reclined at table.  and when the disciples saw it they were indignant saying “why this waste?  for this could have been sold for a large sum and (l)given to the poor.”  but (m)jesus aware of this said to them “why do you trouble the woman? for she has done a beautiful thing to me.  for (n)you always have the poor with you but (o)you will not always have me.  in pouring this ointment on my body she has done it (p)to prepare me for burial.  truly i say to you wherever (q)this gospel is proclaimed in the whole world what she has done will also be told (r)in memory of her.” (s)then one of the twelve whose name was (t)judas iscariot went to the chief priests  and said “what will you give me if i deliver him over to you?” and they (u)paid him (v)thirty pieces of silver.  and from that moment he sought an opportunity (w)to betray him. (x)now on (y)the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to jesus saying “where will you have us prepare for you to eat the passover?”  he said “go into the city to a certain man and say to him (z)‘the teacher says (aa)my time is at hand. i will keep the passover at your house with my disciples.’”  and the disciples did as jesus had directed them and they prepared the passover. (ab)when it was evening he reclined at table with the twelve.[b]  and as they were eating (ac)he said “truly i say to you one of you will betray me.”  and they were very sorrowful and began to say to him one after another “is it i lord?”  he answered (ad)“he who has dipped his hand in the dish with me will betray me.  the son of man goes (ae)as it is written of him but (af)woe to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed! (ag)it would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”  judas who would betray him answered “is it i (ah)rabbi?” he said to him (ai)“you have said so.” (aj)now as they were eating jesus took bread and (ak)after blessing it broke it and gave it to the disciples and said “take eat (al)this is my body.”  and he took a cup and when he (am)had given thanks he gave it to them saying “drink of it all of you  for (an)this is my (ao)blood of the[c] covenant which is poured out for (ap)many (aq)for the forgiveness of sins.  i tell you i will not drink again of this fruit of the vine until that day when i drink it new with you (ar)in my father's kingdom.” (as)and when they had sung a hymn (at)they went out to (au)the mount of olives.  then jesus said to them “you will all fall away because of me this night. for it is written ‘i will (av)strike the shepherd and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’  but after i am raised up (aw)i will go before you to galilee.”  (ax)peter answered him “though they all fall away because of you i will never fall away.”  (ay)jesus said to him “truly i tell you this very night (az)before the rooster crows you will deny me three times.”  (ba)peter said to him “even if i must die with you i will not deny you!” and all the disciples said the same. (bb)then jesus went with them (bc)to a place called gethsemane and he said to his disciples “sit here while i go over there and pray.”  and taking with him (bd)peter and (be)the two sons of zebedee he began to be sorrowful and troubled.  then he said to them (bf)“my soul is very sorrowful even to death remain here and (bg)watch[d] with me.”  and going a little farther he fell on his face (bh)and prayed saying “my father if it be possible let (bi)this cup pass from me (bj)nevertheless not as i will but as you will.”  and he came to the disciples and found them sleeping. and he said to peter “so could you not watch with me one hour?  (bk)watch and (bl)pray that you (bm)may not enter into temptation. the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak.”  again for the second time he went away and prayed “my father if this cannot pass unless i drink it (bn)your will be done.”  and again he came and found them sleeping for (bo)their eyes were heavy.  so leaving them again he went away and prayed for (bp)the third time saying the same words again.  then he came to the disciples and said to them “sleep and take your rest later on.[e] see (bq)the hour is at hand and (br)the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.  rise let us be going see my betrayer is at hand.” (bs)while he was still speaking (bt)judas came one of the twelve and with him a great crowd with swords and clubs from the chief priests and the elders of the people.  now the betrayer had given them a sign saying “the one i will kiss is the man seize him.”  and he came up to jesus at once and said “greetings (bu)rabbi!” and he kissed him.  jesus said to him (bv)“friend (bw)do what you came to do.”[f] then they came up and laid hands on jesus and seized him.  and behold one of those who were with jesus stretched out his hand and drew his (bx)sword and struck the servant[g] of the high priest and cut off his ear.  then jesus said to him “put your sword back into its place. for (by)all who take the sword will perish by the sword.  (bz)do you think that i cannot appeal to my father and he will at once send me (ca)more than twelve (cb)legions of angels?  (cc)but how then should the scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?”  at that hour jesus said to the crowds “have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to capture me? day after day (cd)i sat in the temple (ce)teaching and you did not seize me.  but (cf)all this has taken place that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” (cg)then all the disciples left him and fled. (ch)then (ci)those who had seized jesus led him to (cj)caiaphas the high priest where the scribes and the elders had gathered.  and (ck)peter was following him at a distance as far as (cl)the courtyard of the high priest and going inside he sat with (cm)the guards to see the end.  now the chief priests and the whole council[h] (cn)were seeking false testimony against jesus that they might put him to death  but they found none (co)though many false witnesses came forward. at last (cp)two came forward  and said “this man said (cq)‘i am able to (cr)destroy the temple of god and to rebuild it in three days.’”  and the high priest stood up and said “have you no answer to make? what is it that these men testify against you?”[i]  (cs)but jesus remained silent. (ct)and the high priest said to him (cu)“i adjure you by (cv)the living god (cw)tell us if you are (cx)the christ (cy)the son of god.”  jesus said to him (cz)“you have said so. but i tell you from now on (da)you will see the son of man (db)seated at the right hand of power and (dc)coming on the clouds of heaven.”  then the high priest (dd)tore his robes and said (de)“he has uttered blasphemy. what further witnesses do we need? you have now heard his blasphemy.  what is your judgment?” they answered (df)“he deserves death.”  then (dg)they spit in his face (dh)and (di)struck him. and some slapped him  saying “prophesy to us you (dj)christ! who is it that struck you?” (dk)now peter was sitting outside (dl)in the courtyard. and a servant girl came up to him and said “you also were with jesus the galilean.”  but he denied it before them all saying “i do not know what you mean.”  and when he went out to the entrance another servant girl saw him and she said to the bystanders “this man was with jesus (dm)of nazareth.”  and again he denied it with an oath “i do not know the man.”  after a little while the bystanders came up and said to peter “certainly you too are one of them for (dn)your accent betrays you.”  then he began to invoke a curse on himself and to swear “i do not know the man.” and immediately the rooster crowed.  and peter remembered the saying of jesus (do)“before the rooster crows you will (dp)deny me three times.” and he went out and wept bitterly. (a)when morning came all the chief priests and the elders of the people (b)took counsel against jesus to put him to death.  and they bound him and (c)led him away and (d)delivered him over to (e)pilate the governor. then when (f)judas his betrayer saw that jesus[a] was condemned (g)he changed his mind and brought back (h)the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and the elders  saying “i have sinned by betraying innocent blood.” they said “what is that to us? (i)see to it yourself.”  and throwing down the pieces of silver into the temple (j)he departed and he went and hanged himself.  but the chief priests taking the pieces of silver said “it is not lawful to put them into (k)the treasury since it is blood money.”  so they took counsel and bought with them the potter's field as a burial place for strangers.  therefore (l)that field has been called the field of blood (m)to this day.  (n)then was fulfilled what had been spoken by the prophet jeremiah saying (o)“and they took the thirty pieces of silver the price of him on whom a price had been set by some of the sons of israel  and they gave them for the potter's field as the lord directed me.” (p)now jesus stood before the governor and the governor asked him “are you (q)the king of the jews?” jesus said (r)“you have said so.”  (s)but when he was accused by the chief priests and elders he gave no answer.  then pilate said to him (t)“do you not hear how many things they testify against you?”  but he gave him no answer not even to a single charge so that the governor was greatly amazed. (u)now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release for the crowd any one prisoner whom they wanted.  and they had then a notorious prisoner called barabbas.  so when they had gathered pilate said to them “whom do you want me to release for you barabbas or (v)jesus who is called christ?”  for he knew that it was out (w)of envy that they had delivered him up.  besides while he was sitting on (x)the judgment seat his wife sent word to him “have nothing to do with (y)that righteous man for i have suffered much because of him today (z)in a dream.”  now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to (aa)ask for barabbas and destroy jesus.  the governor again said to them “which of the two do you want me to release for you?” and they said “barabbas.”  pilate said to them “then what shall i do with jesus who is called christ?” (ab)they all said “let him be crucified!”  and he said “why? (ac)what evil has he done?” but they shouted all the more “let him be crucified!” so when pilate saw that he was gaining nothing but rather that (ad)a riot was beginning he took water and (ae)washed his hands before the crowd saying “i am innocent of (af)this man's blood[b] (ag)see to it yourselves.”  and all the people answered (ah)“his blood be on us and (ai)on our children!”  then he released for them barabbas and having (aj)scourged[c] jesus delivered him to be crucified. (ak)then the soldiers of the governor took jesus into the (al)governor's headquarters[d] and they gathered the whole (am)battalion[e] before him.  and they stripped him and put (an)a scarlet robe on him  and twisting together a crown of thorns they put it on his head and put a reed in his right hand. and kneeling before him they (ao)mocked him saying “hail (ap)king of the jews!”  and (aq)they spit on him and took the reed and struck him on the head.  and when they had mocked him they stripped him of the robe and put his own clothes on him and (ar)led him away to crucify him. (as)(at)as they went out they found a man of cyrene simon by name. they compelled this man to (au)carry his cross.  (av)and when they came to a place called golgotha (which means place of a skull)  (aw)they offered him wine to drink mixed with (ax)gall but when he tasted it he would not drink it.  and when they had crucified him (ay)they divided his garments among them by casting lots.  then they sat down and (az)kept watch over him there.  and over his head they put the charge against him which read “this is jesus (ba)the king of the jews.”  then two (bb)robbers were crucified with him (bc)one on the right and one on the left.  and (bd)those who passed by (be)derided him (bf)wagging their heads  and saying (bg)“you who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days save yourself! (bh)if you are (bi)the son of god come down from the cross.”  so also the chief priests with the scribes and elders mocked him saying  (bj)“he saved others (bk)he cannot save himself. (bl)he is the king of israel let him come down now from the cross and we will believe in him.  (bm)he trusts in god let god deliver him now if he desires him. for he said ‘i am the son of god.’”  (bn)and the robbers who were crucified with him also reviled him in the same way. now from the sixth hour[f] there was darkness over all the land[g] until the ninth hour.[h]  and about the ninth hour jesus (bo)cried out with a loud voice saying (bp)“eli eli lema sabachthani?” that is “my god my god why have you forsaken me?”  and some of the bystanders hearing it said “this man is calling elijah.”  and one of them at once ran and took a sponge filled it with (bq)sour wine and put it on a reed and (br)gave it to him to drink.  but the others said “wait let us see whether elijah will come to save him.”  and jesus (bs)cried out again with a loud voice and (bt)yielded up his spirit. and behold (bu)the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. and (bv)the earth shook and the rocks were split.  the tombs also were opened. and many bodies of (bw)the saints (bx)who had fallen asleep were raised  and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection they went into (by)the holy city and appeared to many.  (bz)when the centurion and those who were with him (ca)keeping watch over jesus saw the earthquake and what took place they were filled with awe and said (cb)“truly this was the son[i] of god!” there were also (cc)many women there looking on (cd)from a distance who had followed jesus from galilee (ce)ministering to him  among whom were (cf)mary magdalene and mary the mother of james and joseph and (cg)the mother of the sons of zebedee. (ch)when it was evening there came a rich man from arimathea named joseph who also was a disciple of jesus.  he went to pilate and asked for the body of jesus. then pilate ordered it to be given to him.  and joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean linen shroud  and (ci)laid it in his own new tomb (cj)which he had cut in the rock. and he rolled (ck)a great stone to the entrance of the tomb and went away.  mary magdalene and (cl)the other mary were there sitting opposite the tomb. the next day that is after the day of (cm)preparation the chief priests and the pharisees gathered before pilate  and said “sir we remember how (cn)that impostor said while he was still alive (co)‘after three days i will rise.’  therefore order the tomb to be made secure until the third day (cp)lest his disciples go and steal him away and tell the people ‘he has risen from the dead’ and the last fraud will be worse than the first.”  pilate said to them “you have (cq)a guard[j] of soldiers. go make it as secure as you can.”  so they went and made the tomb secure by (cr)sealing the stone and setting a guard. (a)now after the sabbath toward the dawn of the first day of the week mary magdalene and (b)the other mary went to see the tomb.  and behold there was a great earthquake for (c)an angel of the lord descended from heaven and came and rolled back the stone and sat on it.  (d)his appearance was like lightning and (e)his clothing white as snow.  and for fear of him the guards trembled and (f)became like dead men.  but the angel said to the women “do not be afraid for i know that you seek jesus who was crucified.  he is not here for he has risen (g)as he said. come see the place where he[a] lay.  then go quickly and tell his disciples that he has risen from the dead and behold (h)he is going before you to galilee there you will see him. see i have told you.”  so they departed quickly from the tomb (i)with fear and great joy and ran to tell his disciples.  and behold jesus (j)met them and said “greetings!” and they came up and (k)took hold of his feet and (l)worshiped him.  then jesus said to them “do not be afraid (m)go and tell (n)my brothers to go to galilee and there they will see me.” while they were going behold some of (o)the guard went into the city and told the chief priests all that had taken place.  and when they had assembled with the elders and taken counsel they gave a sufficient sum of money to the soldiers  and said “tell people (p)‘his disciples came by night and stole him away while we were asleep.’  and if this comes to (q)the governor's ears we will (r)satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”  so they took the money and did as they were directed. and this story has been spread among the jews (s)to this day. now the eleven disciples (t)went to galilee to the mountain to which jesus had directed them.  and when they saw him they (u)worshiped him but some doubted.  and jesus came and said to them (v)“all authority (w)in heaven and on earth has been given to me.  (x)go therefore and (y)make disciples of (z)all nations (aa)baptizing them (ab)in[b] (ac)the name of the father and of the son and of the holy spirit  teaching them (ad)to observe all that (ae)i have commanded you. and behold (af)i am with you always to (ag)the end of the age.” in the first book o (a)theophilus i have dealt with all that jesus began (b)to do and teach  until the day when (c)he was taken up after he (d)had given commands (e)through the holy spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen.  (f)he presented himself alive to them after his suffering by many proofs appearing to them during forty days and speaking about the kingdom of god. and while staying[a] with them (g)he ordered them not to depart from jerusalem but to wait for the promise of the father which he said “you heard from me  for (h)john baptized with water (i)but you will be baptized (j)with[b] the holy spirit not many days from now.” so when they had come together they asked him “lord (k)will you at this time (l)restore the kingdom to israel?”  he said to them (m)“it is not for you to know (n)times or seasons that the father has fixed by his own authority.  but you will receive (o)power (p)when the holy spirit has come upon you and (q)you will be (r)my witnesses in jerusalem and in all judea and (s)samaria and (t)to the end of the earth.”  and when he had said these things as they were looking on (u)he was lifted up and (v)a cloud took him out of their sight.  and while they were gazing into heaven as he went behold (w)two (x)men stood by them in (y)white robes  and said (z)“men of galilee why do you stand looking into heaven? this jesus who was taken up from you into heaven (aa)will (ab)come in the same way as you saw him go into heaven.” then (ac)they returned to jerusalem from the mount called olivet which is near jerusalem a sabbath day's journey away.  and when they had entered they went up to (ad)the upper room where they were staying (ae)peter and john and james and andrew philip and thomas bartholomew and matthew james the son of alphaeus and simon (af)the zealot and judas the son of james.  all these (ag)with one accord (ah)were devoting themselves to prayer together with (ai)the women and mary the mother of jesus and (aj)his brothers.[c] in those days peter stood up among (ak)the brothers (the company of persons was in all about ) and said  “brothers (al)the scripture had to be fulfilled which the holy spirit spoke beforehand by the mouth of david concerning judas (am)who became a guide to those who arrested jesus.  for (an)he was numbered among us and was allotted his share in (ao)this ministry.”  (now this man (ap)acquired a field with (aq)the reward of his wickedness and falling headlong[d] he burst open in the middle and all his bowels gushed out.  and it became known to all the inhabitants of jerusalem so that the field was called (ar)in their own language akeldama that is field of blood.)  “for it is written in the book of psalms (as)“‘may his camp become desolate    and let there be no one to dwell in it’ and (at)“‘let another take his office.’ so one of the men who have accompanied us during (au)all the time that the lord jesus (av)went in and out among us  (aw)beginning from the baptism of john until the day when (ax)he was taken up from us—one of these men must become with us (ay)a witness to his resurrection.”  and they put forward two joseph called (az)barsabbas who was also called (ba)justus and (bb)matthias.  and (bc)they prayed and said “you lord (bd)who know the hearts of all show which one of these two you have chosen  to take the place in (be)this ministry and (bf)apostleship from which judas turned aside to go to his own place.”  and they cast lots for them and the lot fell on matthias and he was numbered with the eleven apostles. when (a)the day of pentecost arrived they were all together in one place.  and suddenly there came from heaven a sound like (b)a mighty rushing wind and (c)it filled the entire house where they were sitting.  and divided tongues (d)as of fire appeared to them and rested[a] on each one of them.  and they were all (e)filled with the holy spirit and began (f)to speak in other tongues (g)as the spirit gave them utterance. now there were dwelling in jerusalem jews devout men from every nation under heaven.  and (h)at this sound the multitude came together and they were bewildered because each one was hearing them speak in his own language.  and (i)they were amazed and astonished saying “are not all these who are speaking (j)galileans?  and how is it that we hear each of us in his own native language?  parthians and (k)medes and (l)elamites and residents of mesopotamia judea and cappadocia pontus and asia  phrygia and pamphylia egypt and the parts of libya belonging to cyrene and visitors from rome  both jews and (m)proselytes cretans and arabians—we hear them telling in our own tongues the mighty works of god.”  and (n)all were amazed and perplexed saying to one another “what does this mean?”  but others (o)mocking said “they are filled with new wine.” but peter standing with the eleven lifted up his voice and addressed them “men of judea and all who dwell in jerusalem let this be known to you and give ear to my words.  for these people are not drunk as you suppose (p)since it is only the third hour of the day.[b]  but this is what was uttered through the prophet joel (q)“‘and in the last days it shall be god declares(r)that i will pour out my spirit (s)on all fleshand your sons and (t)your daughters shall prophesy    and your young men shall see visions    and your old men shall dream dreams even on my male servants and female servants    in those days i will pour out my spirit and (u)they shall prophesy. and i will show wonders in the heavens above    and signs on the earth below    blood and fire and vapor of smoke (v)the sun shall be turned to darkness    and the moon to blood    before (w)the day of the lord comes the great and magnificent day. and it shall come to pass that (x)everyone who calls upon the name of the lord shall be saved.’ “men of israel hear these words jesus of nazareth (y)a man attested to you by god (z)with (aa)mighty works and wonders and signs that (ab)god did through him in your midst as you yourselves know—  this jesus[c] (ac)delivered up according to (ad)the definite plan and (ae)foreknowledge of god (af)you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men.  (ag)god raised him up loosing the pangs of death because (ah)it was not possible for him to be held by it.  for david says concerning him (ai)“‘i saw the lord always before me    for he is at my right hand that i may not be shaken therefore my heart was glad and my tongue rejoiced    my flesh also will dwell (aj)in hope. for you will not abandon my soul to (ak)hades    (al)or let your (am)holy one (an)see corruption. you have made known to me the paths of life    you will make me full of gladness with your presence.’ “brothers i may say to you with confidence about (ao)the patriarch david (ap)that he both died and (aq)was buried and (ar)his tomb is with us to this day.  (as)being therefore a prophet and knowing that (at)god had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants on his throne  he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the christ that (au)he was not abandoned to hades nor did his flesh see corruption.  this jesus (av)god raised up (aw)and of that we all are witnesses.  (ax)being therefore (ay)exalted at the right hand of god and having received from (az)the father (ba)the promise of the holy spirit (bb)he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing.  for (bc)david did not ascend into the heavens but he himself says (bd)“‘the lord said to my lord“sit at my right hand     until i make your enemies your footstool.”’ let all the house of israel therefore know for certain that (be)god has made him (bf)both lord and christ this jesus (bg)whom you crucified.” now when (bh)they heard this they were cut to the heart and said to peter and the rest of the apostles “brothers (bi)what shall we do?”  and peter said to them (bj)“repent and (bk)be baptized every one of you (bl)in the name of jesus christ (bm)for the forgiveness of your sins and you will receive (bn)the gift of the holy spirit.  for (bo)the promise is for you and (bp)for your children and for all (bq)who are far off everyone (br)whom the lord our god calls to himself.”  and with many other words he bore witness and continued to exhort them saying (bs)“save yourselves from this (bt)crooked generation.”  so those who received his word were baptized and (bu)there were added that day about three thousand souls. and (bv)they devoted themselves to the apostles' (bw)teaching and the (bx)fellowship to (by)the breaking of bread and the prayers.  and awe[d] came upon every soul and (bz)many wonders and signs were being done through the apostles.  and all who believed were together and (ca)had all things in common.  and (cb)they were selling their possessions and belongings and distributing the proceeds to all as any had need.  and day by day (cc)attending the temple (cd)together and (ce)breaking bread in their homes they received their food (cf)with glad and generous hearts  praising god and (cg)having favor with all the people. and the lord (ch)added to their number (ci)day by day those who (cj)were being saved. now peter and john were (a)going up to the temple at (b)the hour of prayer (c)the ninth hour.[a]  and a man (d)lame from birth was being carried (e)whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple that is called the beautiful gate (f)to ask alms of those entering the temple.  seeing peter and john about to go into the temple he asked to receive alms.  and peter directed his gaze at him as did john and said “look at us.”  and he fixed his attention on them expecting to receive something from them.  but peter said (g)“i have no silver and gold but what i do have i give to you. (h)in the name of jesus christ of nazareth rise up and walk!”  and he took him by the right hand and raised him up and immediately his feet and ankles were made strong.  and (i)leaping up he stood and began to walk and entered the temple with them walking and leaping and praising god.  and (j)all the people saw him walking and praising god  and recognized him as the one who sat at the beautiful gate of the temple asking for alms. and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him. (k)while he clung to peter and john all the people utterly astounded ran together to them in (l)the portico called solomon's.  and when peter saw it he addressed the people “men of israel why do you wonder at this or why do you stare at us as though by our own power or piety we have made him walk?  (m)the god of abraham the god of isaac and the god of jacob (n)the god of our fathers (o)glorified his servant[b] jesus whom (p)you delivered over and (q)denied in the presence of pilate (r)when he had decided to release him.  but you denied (s)the holy and (t)righteous one and (u)asked for a murderer to be granted to you  and you killed (v)the author of life (w)whom god raised from the dead. to this we are witnesses.  and (x)his name—by (y)faith in his name—has made this man strong whom you see and know and the faith that is (z)through jesus[c] has given the man this perfect health in the presence of you all. “and now brothers i know that (aa)you acted in ignorance as did also your rulers.  but what god (ab)foretold (ac)by the mouth of all the prophets that (ad)his christ would (ae)suffer he thus fulfilled.  (af)repent therefore and (ag)turn back that (ah)your sins may be blotted out  that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the lord and that he may send the christ (ai)appointed for you jesus  (aj)whom heaven must receive until the time for (ak)restoring all the things about which (al)god spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets long ago.  moses said ‘the lord god will raise up for you (am)a prophet like me from your brothers. you shall listen (an)to him in whatever he tells you.  and it shall be that every soul who does not listen to that prophet (ao)shall be destroyed from the people.’  and (ap)all the prophets who have spoken from samuel and those who came after him also proclaimed these days.  (aq)you are the sons of the prophets and of (ar)the covenant that god made with your fathers saying to abraham (as)‘and in your offspring shall all the families of the earth be blessed.’  (at)god (au)having raised up his servant sent him to you first (av)to bless you (aw)by turning every one of you from your wickedness.” and as they were speaking to the people the priests and (a)the captain of the temple and (b)the sadducees came upon them  greatly annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming (c)in jesus the resurrection from the dead.  and they arrested them and (d)put them in custody until the next day for it was already evening.  but many of those who had heard the word believed and (e)the number of the men came to about five thousand. on the next day their rulers and elders and scribes gathered together in jerusalem  with (f)annas the high priest and (g)caiaphas and john and alexander and all who were of the highpriestly family.  and when they had set them in the midst they inquired (h)“by what power or (i)by what name did you do this?”  then peter (j)filled with the holy spirit said to them “rulers of the people and elders  if we are being examined today (k)concerning a good deed done to a crippled man by what means this man has been healed  let it be known to all of you and to all the people of israel that (l)by the name of jesus christ of nazareth whom you crucified (m)whom god raised from the dead—by him this man is standing before you well.  (n)this jesus[a] is the stone that was (o)rejected by you the builders which has become the cornerstone.[b]  and there is (p)salvation (q)in no one else for (r)there is no other (s)name under heaven given among men[c] by which we must be saved.” (t)now when they saw the boldness of peter and john and perceived that they were uneducated common men they were astonished. and they recognized that they had been with jesus.  but seeing the man who was healed (u)standing beside them (v)they had nothing to say in opposition.  but when they had commanded them to leave the council they conferred with one another  saying (w)“what shall we do with these men? for that (x)a notable sign has been performed through them is evident to all the inhabitants of jerusalem and we cannot deny it.  but in order that it may spread no further among the people let us warn them (y)to speak no more to anyone in this name.”  so they called them and charged them not to speak or teach at all in the name of jesus.  but peter and john answered them (z)“whether it is right in the sight of god to listen to you rather than to god you must judge  for (aa)we cannot but speak of what (ab)we have seen and heard.”  and when they had further threatened them they let them go finding no way to punish them (ac)because of the people for all were praising god (ad)for what had happened.  for the man on whom this sign of healing was performed was more than forty years old. when they were released they went to their friends and reported what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.  and when they heard it they lifted their voices (ae)together to god and said “sovereign lord (af)who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them  who through the mouth of our father david your servant[d] said by the holy spirit (ag)“‘why did the gentiles rage    and the peoples plot in vain? the kings of the earth set themselves    and (ah)the rulers were gathered together    against the lord and against his (ai)anointed’[e]— for truly in this city there were gathered together against your (aj)holy servant jesus (ak)whom you anointed both (al)herod and (am)pontius pilate along (an)with the gentiles and (ao)the peoples of israel  (ap)to do whatever your hand and (aq)your plan had predestined to take place.  and now lord (ar)look upon their threats and grant to your servants to continue to speak your word with all (as)boldness  while (at)you stretch out your hand to heal and signs and wonders are performed (au)through the name of your (av)holy servant jesus.”  and when they had prayed (aw)the place in which they were gathered together was shaken and (ax)they were all filled with the holy spirit and (ay)continued to speak the word of god with boldness. now the full number of those who believed were of (az)one heart and (ba)soul and no one said that any of the things that belonged to him was his own but (bb)they had everything in common.  and with great (bc)power the apostles were giving their testimony to the resurrection of the lord jesus and (bd)great grace was upon them all.  (be)there was not a needy person among them for (bf)as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them and brought the proceeds of what was sold  and (bg)laid it at the apostles' feet and (bh)it was distributed to each as any had need.  thus joseph who was also called by the apostles barnabas (which means (bi)son of encouragement) a levite a native of cyprus  sold a field that belonged to him and brought the money and (bj)laid it at the apostles' feet. but a man named ananias with his wife sapphira sold a piece of property  and with his wife's knowledge (a)he kept back for himself some of the proceeds and brought only a part of it and (b)laid it at the apostles' feet.  but peter said “ananias why has (c)satan filled your heart to lie (d)to the holy spirit and (e)to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land?  while it remained unsold did it not remain your own? and after it was sold was it not at your disposal? why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? you have not lied to man but (f)to god.”  when ananias heard these words he (g)fell down and breathed his last. and (h)great fear came upon all who heard of it.  the young men rose and (i)wrapped him up and carried him out and buried him. after an interval of about three hours his wife came in not knowing what had happened.  and peter said to her “tell me whether you[a] sold the land for so much.” and she said “yes for so much.”  but peter said to her “how is it that you have agreed together (j)to test (k)the spirit of the lord? behold the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door and they will carry you out.”  immediately she fell down at his feet and breathed her last. when the young men came in they found her dead and they carried her out and buried her beside her husband.  and (l)great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard of these things. now many signs and wonders were regularly done among the people (m)by the hands of the apostles. and they were all (n)together in (o)solomon's portico.  none of the rest dared join them but (p)the people held them in high esteem.  and (q)more than ever believers were added to the lord multitudes of both men and women  (r)so that they even (s)carried out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mats that as peter came by (t)at least his shadow might fall on some of them.  the people also gathered from the towns around jerusalem (u)bringing the sick and those afflicted with unclean spirits and they were all healed. but the high priest rose up and all who were with him (that is the party of (v)the sadducees) and filled with (w)jealousy  they arrested the apostles and (x)put them in the public prison.  but during the night (y)an angel of the lord (z)opened the prison doors and brought them out and said  “go and stand in the temple and speak to the people all (aa)the words of (ab)this (ac)life.”  and when they heard this (ad)they entered the temple (ae)at daybreak and began to teach. now when the high priest came and those who were with him they called together the council all the senate of the people of israel and sent to the prison to have them brought.  but when the officers came they did not find them in the prison so they returned and reported  “we found the prison securely locked and the guards standing at the doors but when we opened them we found no one inside.”  now when (af)the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words they were greatly perplexed about them wondering what this would come to.  and someone came and told them “look! the men whom you put in prison (ag)are standing in the temple and teaching the people.”  then (ah)the captain with the officers went and brought them but not by force for (ai)they were afraid of being stoned by the people. and when they had brought them they set them before the council. and the high priest questioned them  saying (aj)“we strictly charged you not to teach in this name yet here you have filled jerusalem with your teaching and you (ak)intend to bring this man's blood upon us.”  but peter and the apostles answered (al)“we must obey god rather than men.  (am)the god of our fathers (an)raised jesus (ao)whom you killed by hanging him on (ap)a tree.  god exalted (aq)him at his right hand as (ar)leader and (as)savior (at)to give (au)repentance to israel and (av)forgiveness of sins.  and (aw)we are witnesses to these things and (ax)so is the holy spirit (ay)whom god has given to those who obey him.” when they heard this they (az)were enraged and wanted to kill them.  but a pharisee in the council named (ba)gamaliel (bb)a teacher of the law held in honor by all the people stood up and gave orders to put the men outside for a little while.  and he said to them “men of israel take care what you are about to do with these men.  for (bc)before these days theudas rose up (bd)claiming to be somebody and a number of men about four hundred joined him. he was killed and all who followed him were dispersed and came to nothing.  after him judas the galilean rose up in the days of (be)the census and drew away some of the people after him. he too perished and all who followed him were scattered.  so in the present case i tell you keep away from these men and let them alone for (bf)if this plan or this undertaking is of man it will fail  but (bg)if it is of god you will not be able to overthrow them. you (bh)might even be found opposing god!” so they took his advice  and (bi)when they had called in the apostles (bj)they beat them and charged them not to speak in the name of jesus and let them go.  then they left the presence of the council (bk)rejoicing that they were counted worthy (bl)to suffer dishonor for (bm)the name.  and every day (bn)in the temple and from house to house they did not cease teaching and (bo)preaching (bp)that the christ is jesus. now in these days (a)when the disciples were increasing in number a complaint by the hellenists[a] arose against the hebrews because their widows were being neglected in (b)the daily distribution.  and the twelve summoned the full number of the disciples and said “it is not right that we should give up preaching the word of god to serve tables.  (c)therefore brothers[b] pick out from among you seven men (d)of good repute (e)full of the spirit and of wisdom whom we will appoint to this duty.  but (f)we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”  and what they said pleased the whole gathering and they chose stephen (g)a man full of faith and (h)of the holy spirit and (i)philip and prochorus and nicanor and timon and parmenas and nicolaus (j)a proselyte of antioch.  these they set before the apostles and (k)they prayed and (l)laid their hands on them. and (m)the word of god continued to increase and the number of the disciples multiplied greatly in jerusalem and a great many of the priests (n)became obedient to (o)the faith. and stephen full of grace and (p)power was doing great wonders and signs among the people.  then some of those who belonged to the synagogue of the freedmen (as it was called) and of the cyrenians and of the alexandrians and of those from cilicia and asia rose up and disputed with stephen.  but (q)they could not withstand the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking.  then (r)they secretly instigated men who said “we have heard him speak blasphemous words against moses and god.”  and they stirred up the people and the elders and the scribes and they came upon him and seized him and brought him before the council  and they (s)set up false (t)witnesses who said “this man never ceases to speak words against (u)this holy place and the law  for we have heard him say that this jesus of nazareth (v)will destroy this place and will (w)change (x)the customs that moses delivered to us.”  and gazing at him all who sat in the council saw that his face (y)was like the face of an angel. and the high priest said “are these things so?”  and stephen said (a)“brothers and fathers hear me. (b)the god (c)of glory appeared to our father abraham when he was in mesopotamia (d)before he lived in haran  and said to him (e)‘go out from your land and from your kindred and go into the land that i will show you.’  (f)then he went out from the land of the chaldeans and lived in haran. and (g)after his father died (h)god removed him from there into this land in which you are now living.  yet he gave him no inheritance in it not even a foot's length but promised (i)to give it to him as a possession and to his offspring after him (j)though he had no child.  and god spoke to this effect—that (k)his offspring would (l)be sojourners in a land belonging to others who would enslave them and afflict them (m)four hundred years.  ‘but (n)i will judge the nation that they serve’ said god ‘and after that they shall come out (o)and worship me in this place.’  and (p)he gave him the covenant of circumcision. and (q)so abraham became the father of isaac and (r)circumcised him on the eighth day and (s)isaac became the father of jacob and (t)jacob of the twelve patriarchs. “and the patriarchs (u)jealous of joseph (v)sold him into egypt but (w)god was with him  and rescued him out of all his afflictions and (x)gave him favor and wisdom before pharaoh king of egypt (y)who made him ruler over egypt and over all his household.  now (z)there came a famine throughout all egypt and canaan and great affliction and our fathers could find no food.  (aa)but when jacob heard that there was grain in egypt he sent out our fathers on their first visit.  and (ab)on the second visit (ac)joseph made himself known to his brothers and (ad)joseph's family became known to pharaoh.  and (ae)joseph sent and summoned jacob his father and all his kindred (af)seventyfive persons in all.  and (ag)jacob went down into egypt and (ah)he died he (ai)and our fathers  and (aj)they were carried back to shechem and laid in the tomb that (ak)abraham had bought for a sum of silver from the sons of hamor in shechem. “but (al)as the time of the promise drew near which god had granted to abraham (am)the people increased and multiplied in egypt  until there arose over egypt another king (an)who did not know joseph.  (ao)he dealt shrewdly with our race and forced our fathers to expose their infants (ap)so that they would not be kept alive.  (aq)at this time moses was born and he was beautiful in god's sight. and he was brought up for three months in his father's house  and (ar)when he was exposed pharaoh's daughter adopted him and brought him up as her own son.  and moses (as)was instructed in (at)all the wisdom of the egyptians and he was (au)mighty in his words and deeds. “when he was forty years old it came into his heart (av)to visit his brothers the children of israel.  and seeing one of them being wronged he defended the oppressed man and avenged him by striking down the egyptian.  he supposed that his brothers would understand that god was giving them salvation by his hand but they did not understand.  (aw)and on the following day he appeared to them as they were quarreling and tried to reconcile them saying ‘men you are brothers. why do you wrong each other?’  but the man who was wronging his neighbor thrust him aside saying (ax)‘who made you a ruler and a judge over us?  do you want to kill me as you killed the egyptian yesterday?’  at this retort (ay)moses fled and became an exile in the land of midian (az)where he became the father of two sons. “now when forty years had passed (ba)an angel appeared to him (bb)in the wilderness of mount sinai in a flame of fire in a bush.  when moses saw it he was amazed at the sight and as he drew near to look there came the voice of the lord  (bc)‘i am the god of your fathers the god of abraham and of isaac and of jacob.’ and moses trembled and did not dare to look.  then the lord said to him (bd)‘take off the sandals from your feet for the place where you are standing is holy ground.  (be)i have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in egypt and (bf)have heard their groaning and (bg)i have come down to deliver them. (bh)and now come i will send you to egypt.’ “this moses whom they rejected (bi)saying ‘who made you a ruler and a judge?’—this man god sent as both ruler and redeemer (bj)by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.  (bk)this man led them out performing (bl)wonders and signs (bm)in egypt and (bn)at the red sea and (bo)in the wilderness for (bp)forty years.  this is the moses who said to the israelites ‘god will raise up for you (bq)a prophet like me from your brothers.’  this is the one (br)who was in the congregation in the wilderness with (bs)the angel who spoke to him at mount sinai and with our fathers. (bt)he received (bu)living (bv)oracles to give to us.  our fathers refused to obey him but thrust him aside and (bw)in their hearts they turned to egypt  saying to aaron (bx)‘make for us gods who will go before us. as for this moses who led us out from the land of egypt we do not know what has become of him.’  and (by)they made a calf in those days and offered a sacrifice to the idol and (bz)were rejoicing in (ca)the works of their hands.  but (cb)god turned away and (cc)gave them over to worship (cd)the host of heaven as it is written in the book of the prophets (ce)“‘did you bring to me slain beasts and sacrifices    (cf)during the forty years in the wilderness o house of israel? you took up the tent of (cg)moloch    and the star of your god rephan    the images that you made to worshipand i will send you into exile beyond babylon.’ “our fathers had (ch)the tent of witness in the wilderness just as he who spoke to moses (ci)directed him to make it according to the pattern that he had seen.  our fathers in turn (cj)brought it in with joshua when they (ck)dispossessed the nations (cl)that god drove out before our fathers. so it was (cm)until the days of david  (cn)who found favor in the sight of god and (co)asked to find a dwelling place for (cp)the god of jacob.[a]  but it was (cq)solomon who built a house for him.  (cr)yet the most high does not dwell (cs)in houses made by hands as the prophet says (ct)“‘heaven is my throne    (cu)and the earth is my footstool.what kind of house will you build for me says the lord    or what is the place of my rest? did not my hand make all these things?’ (cv)“you stiffnecked people (cw)uncircumcised in heart and ears you always resist the holy spirit. (cx)as your fathers did so do you.  (cy)which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? and they killed those who announced beforehand the coming of (cz)the righteous one (da)whom you have now betrayed and murdered  you who received the law (db)as delivered by angels and (dc)did not keep it.” now when they heard these things (dd)they were enraged and they (de)ground their teeth at him.  but he (df)full of the holy spirit gazed into heaven and saw (dg)the glory of god and jesus standing (dh)at the right hand of god.  and he said “behold i see (di)the heavens opened and (dj)the son of man standing (dk)at the right hand of god.”  but they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears and rushed together[b] at him.  then (dl)they cast him out of the city and (dm)stoned him. and (dn)the witnesses laid down their garments (do)at the feet of a young man named saul.  and as they were stoning stephen (dp)he called out “lord jesus (dq)receive my spirit.”  and (dr)falling to his knees he cried out with a loud voice (ds)“lord do not hold this sin against them.” and when he had said this (dt)he fell asleep. and (a)saul (b)approved of his execution. and there arose on that day a great persecution against the church in jerusalem and (c)they were all scattered throughout the regions of judea and samaria except the apostles.  devout men buried stephen and made great lamentation over him.  but (d)saul was ravaging the church and entering house after house he (e)dragged off men and women and committed them to prison. now (f)those who were scattered went about preaching the word.  (g)philip went down to the city[a] of samaria and proclaimed to them the christ.  (h)and the crowds with one accord paid attention to what was being said by philip when they heard him (i)and saw the signs that he did.  for (j)unclean spirits crying out with a loud voice came out of many who had them and many who were paralyzed or lame were healed.  so (k)there was much joy in that city. but there was a man named simon (l)who had previously practiced magic in the city and amazed the people of samaria (m)saying that he himself was somebody great.  they all paid attention to him from the least to the greatest saying (n)“this man is the power of god that is called (o)great.”  and they paid attention to him because for a long time he had (p)amazed them with his magic.  but when (q)they believed philip as he preached good news (r)about the kingdom of god and the name of jesus christ (s)they were baptized both men and women.  even simon himself believed and after being baptized he continued with philip. and (t)seeing signs and (u)great miracles[b] performed (v)he was amazed. now when (w)the apostles at jerusalem heard that (x)samaria had received the word of god they sent to them peter and john  who came down and prayed for them (y)that they might receive the holy spirit  for (z)he had not yet (aa)fallen on any of them but (ab)they had only been baptized in the name of the lord jesus.  then (ac)they laid their hands on them and (ad)they received the holy spirit.  now when simon saw that the spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands he offered them money  saying “give me this power also so that anyone on whom i lay my hands may receive the holy spirit.”  but peter said to him (ae)“may your silver perish with you because you thought you could obtain the gift of god (af)with money!  you have neither part nor lot in this matter for (ag)your heart is not right before god.  repent therefore of this wickedness of yours and pray to the lord that (ah)if possible the intent of your heart may be forgiven you.  for i see that you are in (ai)the gall[c] of bitterness and in (aj)the bond of iniquity.”  and simon answered (ak)“pray for me to the lord that nothing of what you have said may come upon me.” now when they had testified and spoken the word of the lord they returned to jerusalem (al)preaching the gospel to many villages of the samaritans. now (am)an angel of the lord said to philip “rise and go toward the south[d] to the road that goes down from jerusalem to gaza.” this is a desert place.  and he rose and went. and there was an (an)ethiopian a (ao)eunuch a court official of candace queen of the ethiopians (ap)who was in charge of all her treasure. (aq)he had come to jerusalem to worship  and was returning seated in his chariot and he was reading the prophet isaiah.  and the spirit said to philip “go over and join this chariot.”  so philip ran to him and heard him reading isaiah the prophet and asked “do you understand what you are reading?”  and he said (ar)“how can i unless someone (as)guides me?” and (at)he invited philip to come up and sit with him.  now the passage of the scripture that he was reading was this (au)“like a sheep he was led to the slaughter    and like a lamb before its shearer is silent    so he opens not his mouth. in his (av)humiliation justice was denied him.    who can describe his generation?for his life is taken away from the earth.” and the eunuch said to philip “about whom i ask you does the prophet say this about himself or about someone else?”  then philip opened his mouth and (aw)beginning with this scripture (ax)he told him the good news about jesus.  and as they were going along the road they came to some water and the eunuch said “see here is water! (ay)what prevents me from being baptized?”[e]  and he commanded the chariot to stop and they both went down into the water philip and the eunuch and he baptized him.  and when they came up out of the water (az)the spirit of the lord (ba)carried philip away and the eunuch saw him no more and went on his way rejoicing.  but philip found himself at azotus and as he passed through he preached the gospel to all the towns until he came to caesarea. but saul (a)still (b)breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the lord went to (c)the high priest  and asked him for letters (d)to the synagogues at damascus so that if he found any belonging to (e)the way men or women he might bring them bound to jerusalem.  (f)now as he went on his way he approached damascus and suddenly a light from heaven shone around him.  and falling to the ground he heard a voice saying to him “saul saul why are you persecuting (g)me?”  and he said “who are you lord?” and he said “i am jesus (h)whom you are persecuting.  but (i)rise and enter the city and you will be told (j)what you are to do.”  (k)the men who were traveling with him stood speechless (l)hearing the voice but seeing no one.  saul rose from the ground and although his eyes were opened (m)he saw nothing. so they led him by the hand and brought him into damascus.  and for three days he was without sight and neither ate nor drank. now there was a disciple at damascus named (n)ananias. the lord said to him in a vision “ananias.” and he said (o)“here i am lord.”  and the lord said to him “rise and go to the street called straight and at the house of judas look for a man (p)of tarsus named saul for behold he is praying  and he has seen in a vision a man named ananias come in and (q)lay his hands on him so that he might regain his sight.”  but ananias answered “lord i have heard from many about this man (r)how much evil he has done to (s)your (t)saints at jerusalem.  and here he has authority from (u)the chief priests to bind all who (v)call on your name.”  but the lord said to him “go for (w)he is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name (x)before the gentiles and (y)kings and the children of israel.  for (z)i will show him how much (aa)he must suffer (ab)for the sake of my name.”  so (ac)ananias departed and entered the house. and (ad)laying his hands on him he said “brother saul the lord jesus who appeared to you on the road by which you came has sent me so that you may regain your sight and (ae)be filled with the holy spirit.”  and immediately something like scales fell from his eyes and (af)he regained his sight. then (ag)he rose and was baptized  and (ah)taking food he was strengthened. for (ai)some days he was with the disciples at damascus.  and immediately he proclaimed jesus in the synagogues saying (aj)“he is the son of god.”  and all who heard him were amazed and said “is not this the man who (ak)made havoc (al)in jerusalem of those who called upon this name? and has he not come here for this purpose to bring them bound before the chief priests?”  but saul (am)increased all the more in strength and (an)confounded the jews who lived in damascus by proving (ao)that jesus was the christ. (ap)when many days had passed the jews[a] plotted to kill him  but their (aq)plot became known to saul. (ar)they were watching the gates day and night in order to kill him  but his disciples took him by night and (as)let him down through an opening in the wall[b] lowering him in a basket. and (at)when he had come to jerusalem he attempted to join the disciples. and they were all afraid of him for they did not believe that he was a disciple.  but (au)barnabas took him and (av)brought him to the apostles and declared to them (aw)how on the road he had seen the lord who spoke to him and (ax)how at damascus he had (ay)preached boldly in the name of jesus.  so he went (az)in and out among them at jerusalem preaching boldly in the name of the lord.  and he spoke and disputed against (ba)the hellenists.[c] but (bb)they were seeking to kill him.  and when (bc)the brothers learned this they brought him down to caesarea and sent him off (bd)to tarsus. so (be)the church throughout all judea and galilee and samaria had peace and was being built up. and (bf)walking in the fear of the lord and in the comfort of the holy spirit (bg)it multiplied. now (bh)as peter went here and there among them all he came down also to the saints who lived at lydda.  there he found a man named aeneas bedridden for eight years who was paralyzed.  and peter said to him “aeneas (bi)jesus christ heals you rise and make your bed.” and immediately he rose.  (bj)and all the residents of lydda and (bk)sharon saw him and (bl)they turned to the lord. now there was in (bm)joppa a disciple named tabitha which translated means dorcas.[d] she was full of (bn)good works and acts of charity.  in those days she became ill and died and when they had washed her they laid her in (bo)an upper room.  since lydda was near joppa the disciples hearing that peter was there sent two men to him urging him (bp)“please come to us without delay.”  so peter rose and went with them. and when he arrived they took him to (bq)the upper room. all the widows stood beside him weeping and showing tunics[e] and other garments that dorcas made while she was with them.  but peter (br)put them all outside and (bs)knelt down and prayed and turning to the body (bt)he said “tabitha arise.” and she opened her eyes and when she saw peter she sat up.  and he gave her his hand and raised her up. then calling the saints and widows he presented her alive.  and it became known throughout all joppa and (bu)many believed in the lord.  and he stayed in joppa for many days (bv)with one simon a tanner. at caesarea there was a man named cornelius a centurion of (a)what was known as the italian cohort  a devout man (b)who feared god with all his household gave alms generously to the people and prayed continually to god.  (c)about the ninth hour of the day[a] (d)he saw clearly in a vision (e)an angel of god come in and say to him “cornelius.”  and he stared at him in terror and said “what is it lord?” and he said to him “your prayers and your alms (f)have ascended (g)as a memorial before god.  and now send men to joppa and bring one simon who is called peter.  he is lodging (h)with one simon a tanner whose house is by the sea.”  when the angel who spoke to him had departed he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among those who attended him  and having related everything to them he sent them to joppa. the next day as they were on their journey and approaching the city (i)peter went up (j)on the housetop about (k)the sixth hour[b] to pray.  and he became hungry and wanted something to eat but while they were preparing it he fell into (l)a trance  and saw (m)the heavens opened and something like a great sheet descending being let down by its four corners upon the earth.  in it were all kinds of animals and reptiles and birds of the air.  and there came a voice to him “rise peter kill and eat.”  but peter said “by no means lord (n)for i have never eaten anything that is (o)common or (p)unclean.”  and the voice came to him again a second time (q)“what god has made clean do not call common.”  this happened three times and the thing was taken up at once to heaven. now while peter was inwardly perplexed as to what (r)the vision that he had seen might mean behold (s)the men who were sent by cornelius having made inquiry for simon's house stood at the gate  and called out to ask whether simon who was called peter was lodging there.  and while peter was pondering (t)the vision (u)the spirit said to him “behold three men are looking for you.  rise and go down and (v)accompany them without hesitation[c] for i have sent them.”  and peter went down to the men and said “i am the one you are looking for. what is the reason for your coming?”  and they said “cornelius a centurion an upright and (w)godfearing man who is well spoken of by the whole jewish nation was directed by (x)a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and (y)to hear what you have to say.”  so he invited them in to be his guests. the next day he rose and went away with them and (z)some of (aa)the brothers from joppa accompanied him.  and on the following day they entered caesarea. cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.  when peter entered cornelius met him and (ab)fell down at his feet and (ac)worshiped him.  but peter lifted him up saying (ad)“stand up i too am a man.”  and as he talked with him he went in and found many persons gathered.  and he said to them “you yourselves know how unlawful it is for a jew (ae)to associate with or to visit anyone of another nation but (af)god has shown me that i should not call any person common or unclean.  so when i was sent for i came without objection. i ask then why you sent for me.” and cornelius said (ag)“four days ago about this hour i was praying in my house at (ah)the ninth hour[d] and behold (ai)a man stood before me in bright clothing  and said ‘cornelius (aj)your prayer has been heard and your alms have been remembered before god.  send therefore to joppa and ask for simon who is called peter. he is lodging in the house of simon a tanner by the sea.’  so i sent for you at once and you have been kind enough to come. now therefore we are all here in the presence of god to hear all that you have been commanded by the lord.” so peter opened his mouth and said “truly i understand that (ak)god (al)shows no partiality  but (am)in every nation anyone who fears him and (an)does what is right is acceptable to him.  as for (ao)the word that he sent to israel (ap)preaching good news of (aq)peace through jesus christ ((ar)he is lord of all)  you yourselves know what happened throughout all judea (as)beginning (at)from galilee after the baptism that john proclaimed  how (au)god anointed jesus of nazareth (av)with the holy spirit and with (aw)power. he went about doing good and healing all (ax)who were oppressed by the devil (ay)for god was with him.  and (az)we are witnesses of all that he did both in the country of the jews and in jerusalem. (ba)they put him to death by hanging him on a tree  but (bb)god raised him on (bc)the third day and made him to (bd)appear  (be)not to all the people but to us who had been chosen by god as (bf)witnesses who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.  and (bg)he commanded us to preach to the people and to testify (bh)that he is the one appointed by god to be judge (bi)of the living and the dead.  (bj)to him (bk)all the prophets bear witness that (bl)everyone who believes in him receives (bm)forgiveness of sins (bn)through his name.” while peter was still saying these things (bo)the holy spirit fell on all who heard the word.  and the believers from among (bp)the circumcised who had come with peter were amazed because (bq)the gift of the holy spirit (br)was poured out even on the gentiles.  for they were hearing them (bs)speaking in tongues and extolling god. then peter declared  (bt)“can anyone withhold water for baptizing these people who have received the holy spirit (bu)just as we have?”  and he (bv)commanded them (bw)to be baptized in the name of jesus christ. then they asked him to remain for some days. now the apostles and (a)the brothers[a] who were throughout judea heard that the gentiles also had received the word of god.  so when peter went up to jerusalem (b)the circumcision party[b] criticized him saying  (c)“you went to uncircumcised men and (d)ate with them.”  but peter began and explained it to them in order  (e)“i was in the city of joppa praying and in a trance i saw a vision something like a great sheet descending being let down from heaven by its four corners and it came down to me.  looking at it closely i observed animals and beasts of prey and reptiles and birds of the air.  and i heard a voice saying to me ‘rise peter kill and eat.’  but i said ‘by no means lord for nothing common or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’  but the voice answered a second time from heaven ‘what god has made clean do not call common.’  this happened three times and all was drawn up again into heaven.  and behold at that very moment three men arrived at the house in which we were sent to me from caesarea.  and the spirit told me to go with them (f)making no distinction. (g)these six brothers also accompanied me and we entered the man's house.  and he told us how he had seen the angel stand in his house and say ‘send to joppa and bring simon who is called peter  (h)he will declare to you a message by which (i)you will be saved you and all your household.’  as i began to speak (j)the holy spirit fell on them (k)just as on us at the beginning.  and i remembered the word of the lord how he said (l)‘john baptized with water but you will be baptized with the holy spirit.’  if then (m)god gave (n)the same gift to them as he gave to us (o)when we believed in the lord jesus christ (p)who was i (q)that i could stand in god's way?”  when they heard these things they fell silent. and they (r)glorified god saying (s)“then to the gentiles also god has (t)granted (u)repentance that leads to life.” (v)now those who were scattered because of the persecution that arose over stephen traveled as far as phoenicia and cyprus and antioch speaking the word to no one except jews.  but there were some of them men of cyprus and cyrene who on coming to antioch spoke to the hellenists[c] also (w)preaching the lord jesus.  and (x)the hand of the lord was with them and a great number who believed (y)turned to the lord.  the report of this came to the ears of the church in jerusalem and they sent barnabas to antioch.  when he came and saw (z)the grace of god he was glad and he exhorted them all to remain faithful to the lord (aa)with steadfast purpose  for he was a good man (ab)full of the holy spirit and of faith. and a great many people (ac)were added to the lord.  so barnabas went to (ad)tarsus to look for saul  and when he had found him he brought him to antioch. for a whole year they met with the church and taught a great many people. and in antioch the disciples were first called (ae)christians. now in these days (af)prophets came down from jerusalem to antioch.  and one of them named (ag)agabus stood up and foretold (ah)by the spirit that there would be a great (ai)famine over all the world (this took place in the days of (aj)claudius).  so the disciples determined every one according to his ability (ak)to send relief to (al)the brothers[d] living in judea.  (am)and they did so sending it to (an)the elders by the hand of barnabas and saul. about that time herod the king laid violent hands on some who belonged to the church.  he killed (a)james the brother of john (b)with the sword  and when he saw (c)that it pleased the jews he proceeded to arrest peter also. this was during (d)the days of unleavened bread.  and when he had seized him he put him (e)in prison delivering him over to four (f)squads of soldiers to guard him intending after the passover to bring him out to the people.  so peter was kept in prison but earnest (g)prayer for him was made to god by the church. now when herod was about to bring him out on that very night peter was sleeping between two soldiers (h)bound with two chains and sentries before the door were guarding the prison.  and behold (i)an angel of the lord (j)stood next to him and a light shone in the cell. (k)he struck peter on the side and woke him saying “get up quickly.” and (l)the chains fell off his hands.  and the angel said to him “dress yourself and (m)put on your sandals.” and he did so. and he said to him “wrap your cloak around you and follow me.”  and he went out and followed him. he did not know that what was being done by the angel was real but (n)thought he was seeing a vision.  when they had passed the first and the second guard they came to the iron gate leading into the city. (o)it opened for them of its own accord and they went out and went along one street and immediately the angel left him.  when peter (p)came to himself he said “now i am sure that (q)the lord has sent his angel and (r)rescued me from the hand of herod and from all that the jewish people were expecting.” when he realized this he went to the house of mary the mother of (s)john whose other name was mark where many were gathered together and (t)were praying.  and when he knocked at the door of the gateway (u)a servant girl named rhoda came to answer.  recognizing peter's voice (v)in her joy she did not open the gate but ran in and reported that peter was standing at the gate.  they said to her “you are out of your mind.” but she kept insisting that it was so and they kept saying “it is (w)his angel!”  but peter continued knocking and when they opened they saw him and were amazed.  but (x)motioning to them with his hand to be silent he described to them how the lord had brought him out of the prison. and he said “tell these things to (y)james and to (z)the brothers.”[a] then he departed and went to another place. now when day came there was no little disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of peter.  and after herod searched for him and did not find him he examined the sentries and (aa)ordered that they should be put to death. then he went down from judea to caesarea and spent time there. now herod was angry with the people of tyre and sidon and they came to him with one accord and (ab)having persuaded blastus the king's chamberlain[b] they asked for peace because (ac)their country depended on the king's country for food.  on an appointed day herod put on his royal robes took his seat upon the throne and delivered an oration to them.  and the people were shouting “the voice of a god and not of a man!”  immediately (ad)an angel of the lord struck him down because (ae)he did not give god the glory and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last. but (af)the word of god increased and multiplied. (ag)and barnabas and saul returned from[c] jerusalem when they had completed their service bringing with them (ah)john whose other name was mark. now there were in the church at antioch (a)prophets and (b)teachers (c)barnabas simeon who was called niger[a] lucius of cyrene manaen a lifelong friend of (d)herod the tetrarch and saul.  while they were worshiping the lord and fasting (e)the holy spirit said (f)“set apart for me barnabas and saul (g)for the work to which i have called them.”  then after fasting and (h)praying they laid their hands on them and (i)sent them off. so being sent out (j)by the holy spirit they went down to seleucia and from there they sailed to cyprus.  when they arrived at salamis they proclaimed the word of god (k)in the synagogues of the jews. and they had (l)john to (m)assist them.  when they had gone through the whole island as far as paphos they came upon a certain (n)magician (o)a jewish false prophet named barjesus.  he was with (p)the proconsul sergius paulus a man of intelligence who summoned barnabas and saul and sought to hear the word of god.  but elymas the (q)magician (for that is the meaning of his name) (r)opposed them seeking to turn (s)the proconsul away from the faith.  but saul who was also called paul (t)filled with the holy spirit looked intently at him  and said “you (u)son of the devil you enemy of all righteousness full of all deceit and (v)villainy will you not stop (w)making crooked (x)the straight paths of the lord?  and now behold (y)the hand of the lord is upon you and you will be blind and unable to see the sun for a time.” immediately mist and darkness fell upon him and he went about seeking (z)people to lead him by the hand.  then the proconsul believed when he saw what had occurred for he was astonished at (aa)the teaching of the lord. now paul and his companions set sail from paphos and came to perga in pamphylia. and (ab)john left them and returned (ac)to jerusalem  but they went on from perga and came to antioch in pisidia. and (ad)on the sabbath day (ae)they went into the synagogue and sat down.  after (af)the reading from (ag)the law and the prophets (ah)the rulers of the synagogue sent a message to them saying “brothers if you have any (ai)word of encouragement for the people say it.”  so paul stood up and (aj)motioning with his hand said “men of israel and (ak)you who fear god listen.  (al)the god of this people israel (am)chose our fathers and (an)made the people great (ao)during their stay in the land of egypt and (ap)with uplifted arm he led them out of it.  and for about (aq)forty years (ar)he put up with[b] them in the wilderness.  and (as)after destroying (at)seven nations in the land of canaan (au)he gave them their land as an inheritance.  all this took about  years. and after that (av)he gave them judges until (aw)samuel the prophet.  then (ax)they asked for a king and god gave them saul (ay)the son of kish a man of the tribe of benjamin for forty years.  and (az)when he had removed him (ba)he raised up david to be their king of whom he testified and said (bb)‘i have found in david the son of jesse (bc)a man after my heart (bd)who will do all my will.’  (be)of this man's offspring god has brought to israel (bf)a savior jesus (bg)as he promised.  before his coming (bh)john had proclaimed (bi)a baptism of repentance to all the people of israel.  and as john was finishing his course (bj)he said ‘what do you suppose that i am? i am not he. no but behold after me one is coming the sandals of whose feet i am not worthy to untie.’ “brothers sons of the family of abraham and those among you (bk)who fear god to us has been sent (bl)the message of (bm)this salvation.  for those who live in jerusalem and their rulers because (bn)they did not recognize him nor understand (bo)the utterances of the prophets which are read every sabbath (bp)fulfilled them by condemning him.  and (bq)though they found in him no guilt worthy of death (br)they asked pilate to have him executed.  and when (bs)they had carried out all that was written of him (bt)they took him down from (bu)the tree and laid him in a tomb.  but (bv)god raised him from the dead  and for many days (bw)he appeared to those (bx)who had come up with him (by)from galilee to jerusalem (bz)who are now (ca)his witnesses to the people.  and we bring you the good news (cb)that what god promised to the fathers  (cc)this he has fulfilled to us their children by raising jesus as also it is written in the second psalm (cd)“‘you are my son    today i have begotten you.’ and as for the fact that he raised him from the dead (ce)(cf)no more to return to corruption he has spoken in this way “‘i will give you (cg)the holy and sure blessings of david.’ therefore he says also in another psalm (ch)“‘you will not let your holy one see corruption.’ for david after he had (ci)served the purpose of god in his own generation (cj)fell asleep and (ck)was laid with his fathers and saw corruption  but he whom (cl)god raised up did not see corruption.  let it be known to you therefore brothers (cm)that through this man (cn)forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you  and by him (co)everyone who believes is freed[c] from everything (cp)from which you could not be freed by the law of moses.  beware therefore lest what is said in the prophets should come about (cq)“‘look you scoffers    be astounded and perishfor i am doing a work in your days    a work that you will not believe even if one tells it to you.’” as they went out the people begged that these things might be told them the next sabbath.  and after the meeting of the synagogue broke up many jews and (cr)devout (cs)converts to judaism followed paul and barnabas who as they spoke with them urged them (ct)to continue in (cu)the grace of god. the next sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the lord.  (cv)but (cw)when the jews[d] saw the crowds they were filled with (cx)jealousy and began to contradict what was spoken by paul (cy)reviling him.  and paul and barnabas spoke out boldly saying “it was necessary that the word of god (cz)be spoken first to you. (da)since you thrust it aside and judge yourselves (db)unworthy of eternal life behold we (dc)are turning to the gentiles.  (dd)for so the lord has commanded us saying (de)“‘i have made you (df)a light for the gentiles    that you may (dg)bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’” and when the gentiles heard this they began rejoicing and (dh)glorifying the word of the lord and as many as were appointed to eternal life believed.  and the word of the lord was spreading throughout the whole region.  (di)but the jews incited the devout (dj)women of high standing and the leading men of the city (dk)stirred up persecution against paul and barnabas and (dl)drove them out of their district.  but they (dm)shook off the dust from their feet against them and went to iconium.  and the disciples were filled (dn)with joy and (do)with the holy spirit. now at iconium (a)they entered together into the jewish synagogue and spoke in such a way that a great number of both jews and greeks believed.  (b)but the (c)unbelieving jews stirred up the gentiles and poisoned their minds against (d)the brothers.[a]  so they remained for a long time speaking boldly for (e)the lord who bore witness to (f)the word of his grace (g)granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.  but the people of the city (h)were divided (i)some sided with the jews and some with the apostles.  when an attempt was made by both gentiles and jews with their rulers (j)to mistreat them and (k)to stone them  they learned of it and (l)fled to (m)lystra and derbe cities of lycaonia and to the surrounding country  and there they continued to preach the gospel. now at lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet. he was (n)crippled from birth and had never walked.  he listened to paul speaking. and paul looking intently at him and (o)seeing that he had faith to be made well[b]  said in a loud voice “stand upright on your feet.” and he (p)sprang up and began walking.  and when the crowds saw what paul had done they lifted up their voices saying in lycaonian (q)“the gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!”  barnabas they called (r)zeus and paul hermes because he was the chief speaker.  and the priest of (s)zeus whose temple was at the entrance to the city brought oxen and garlands to the gates and (t)wanted to offer sacrifice with the crowds.  but when the apostles barnabas and paul heard of it they (u)tore their garments and rushed out into the crowd crying out  “men (v)why are you doing these things? we also are men (w)of like nature with you and we bring you good news that (x)you should turn from these (y)vain things to (z)a living god (aa)who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them.  in past generations he (ab)allowed all the nations (ac)to walk in their own ways.  yet (ad)he did not leave himself without witness for he (ae)did good by (af)giving you rains from heaven and (ag)fruitful seasons satisfying your hearts with (ah)food and (ai)gladness.”  even with these words they scarcely restrained the people from offering sacrifice to them. (aj)but jews came from antioch and iconium and having persuaded the crowds (ak)they stoned paul and dragged him out of the city supposing that he was dead.  but when the disciples gathered about him he rose up and entered the city and on the next day he went on with barnabas to derbe.  when they had preached the gospel to that city and had (al)made many disciples they returned to lystra and to iconium and to antioch  (am)strengthening the souls of the disciples encouraging them (an)to continue in (ao)the faith and saying that (ap)through many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of god.  and when they had (aq)appointed (ar)elders for them in every church with prayer and fasting (as)they committed them to the lord in whom they had believed. then they passed through pisidia and came to pamphylia.  and when they had spoken the word in perga they went down to attalia  and from there they sailed to antioch (at)where they had been (au)commended to the grace of god for the work that they had fulfilled.  and when they arrived and gathered the church together (av)they declared all that god had done with them and (aw)how he had (ax)opened (ay)a door of faith to the gentiles.  and they remained no little time with the disciples. (a)but some men came down from judea and were teaching (b)the brothers “unless you are (c)circumcised (d)according to the custom of moses you cannot be saved.”  and after paul and barnabas had no small dissension and (e)debate with them paul and barnabas and (f)some of the others were appointed to go up to jerusalem to (g)the apostles and the elders about this question.  so (h)being sent on their way by the church they passed through both phoenicia and samaria (i)describing in detail the conversion of the gentiles and (j)brought great joy to all (k)the brothers.[a]  (l)when they came to jerusalem they were welcomed by the church and (m)the apostles and the elders and (n)they declared all that god had done with them.  but some believers who belonged to (o)the party of the pharisees rose up and said (p)“it is necessary (q)to circumcise them and to order them to keep the law of moses.” (r)the (s)apostles and the elders were gathered together to consider this matter.  and after there had been much (t)debate peter stood up and said to them “brothers you know that in the early days god made a choice among you (u)that by my mouth the gentiles should hear (v)the word of (w)the gospel and believe.  and god (x)who knows the heart (y)bore witness to them (z)by giving them the holy spirit just as he did to us  and (aa)he made no distinction between us and them (ab)having cleansed their hearts (ac)by faith.  now therefore why (ad)are you putting god to the test (ae)by placing a yoke on the neck of the disciples (af)that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?  but we (ag)believe that we will be (ah)saved through (ai)the grace of the lord jesus (aj)just as they will.” and all the assembly fell silent and they listened to barnabas and paul (ak)as they related what signs and wonders god had done through them among the gentiles.  after they finished speaking (al)james replied “brothers listen to me.  (am)simeon has related how god first visited the gentiles to take from them (an)a people for his name.  and with this the words of the prophets agree just as it is written (ao)“‘after this i will returnand i will rebuild the tent of david that has falleni will rebuild its ruins     and i will restore it that the remnant[b] of mankind (ap)may seek the lord    and all the gentiles (aq)who are called by my name     says the lord who makes these things  (ar)known from of old.’ therefore (as)my judgment is that we should not trouble those of the gentiles who (at)turn to god  but should write to them (au)to abstain from (av)the things polluted by idols and from (aw)sexual immorality and from (ax)what has been strangled and from (ay)blood.  for from ancient generations moses has had in every city those who proclaim him (az)for he is read every sabbath in the synagogues.” then it seemed good to (ba)the apostles and the elders with the whole church to choose men from among them and send them to antioch with paul and barnabas. they sent judas called (bb)barsabbas and (bc)silas leading men among (bd)the brothers  with the following letter (be)“the brothers both (bf)the apostles and the elders to the brothers[c] who are of the gentiles in antioch and syria and cilicia (bg)greetings.  since we have heard that (bh)some persons have gone out from us and (bi)troubled you[d] with words unsettling your minds although we gave them no instructions  it has seemed good to us having come (bj)to one accord to choose men and send them to you with our (bk)beloved barnabas and paul  (bl)men who have (bm)risked their lives for the name of our lord jesus christ.  we have therefore sent (bn)judas and silas who themselves will tell you the same things by word of mouth.  for it has seemed good (bo)to the holy spirit and (bp)to us (bq)to lay on you no greater burden than these requirements  (br)that you abstain from (bs)what has been sacrificed to idols and from blood and from what has been strangled and from sexual immorality. if you keep yourselves from these you will do well. farewell.” so when they were sent off they went down to antioch and having gathered the congregation together they delivered the letter.  and when they had read it they rejoiced because of its encouragement.  and judas and silas who were themselves (bt)prophets encouraged and (bu)strengthened (bv)the brothers with many words.  and after they had spent some time they were sent off (bw)in peace by (bx)the brothers to those who had sent them.[e]  but (by)paul and barnabas remained in antioch teaching and preaching the word of the lord with many others also. and after some days paul said to barnabas “let us return and visit (bz)the brothers (ca)in every city where we proclaimed the word of the lord and see how they are.”  now barnabas wanted to take with them (cb)john called mark.  but paul thought best not to take with them one (cc)who had withdrawn from them in pamphylia and had not gone with them to the work.  and there arose (cd)a sharp disagreement so that they separated from each other. (ce)barnabas took mark with him and sailed away to cyprus  but paul chose silas and departed (cf)having been commended by (cg)the brothers to (ch)the grace of the lord.  and he went through syria and cilicia (ci)strengthening the churches. paul[a] came also to derbe and to lystra. a disciple was there named (a)timothy (b)the son of a jewish woman who was a believer but his father was a greek.  he was well spoken of by (c)the brothers[b] at lystra and iconium.  paul wanted timothy to accompany him and he (d)took him and circumcised him because of the jews who were in those places for they all knew that his father was a greek.  as they went on their way through the cities they delivered to them for observance (e)the decisions (f)that had been reached by (g)the apostles and elders who were in jerusalem.  (h)so the churches were strengthened in (i)the faith and they increased in numbers (j)daily. and (k)they went through the region of phrygia and galatia having been forbidden by the holy spirit to speak the word in asia.  and when they had come up to mysia they attempted to go into bithynia but (l)the spirit of jesus did not allow them.  so passing by mysia they went down (m)to troas.  and a vision appeared to paul in the night a man of macedonia was standing there urging him and saying “come over to macedonia and help us.”  and when paul[c] had seen the vision immediately (n)we sought to go on into macedonia concluding that god had called us to preach the gospel to them. so setting sail from troas we (o)made a direct voyage to samothrace and the following day to neapolis  and from there to (p)philippi which is a leading city of the[d] district of macedonia and (q)a roman colony. we remained in this city some days.  and (r)on the sabbath day we went outside the gate (s)to the riverside where we supposed there was a place of prayer and we (t)sat down and spoke to the women who had come together.  one who heard us was a woman named lydia from the city of thyatira a seller of purple goods (u)who was a worshiper of god. the lord (v)opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by paul.  and after she was baptized (w)and her household as well she urged us saying “if you have judged me to be faithful to the lord come to my house and stay.” and she (x)prevailed upon us. as we were going to (y)the place of prayer we were met by a slave girl who had (z)a spirit of (aa)divination and (ab)brought her owners much gain by fortunetelling.  she followed paul and us (ac)crying out “these men are (ad)servants of (ae)the most high god who proclaim to you (af)the way of salvation.”  and this she kept doing for many days. paul having become greatly annoyed turned and said to the spirit (ag)“i command you (ah)in the name of jesus christ to come out of her.” and (ai)it came out that very hour. but (aj)when her owners saw that their hope of gain was gone they seized paul and silas and (ak)dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.  and when they had brought them to the magistrates they said “these men are jews and they are disturbing our city.  they (al)advocate customs that are not lawful for us (am)as romans to accept or practice.”  the crowd joined in attacking them and the magistrates tore the garments off them and gave orders (an)to beat them with rods.  and when they had inflicted many blows upon them they threw them into prison ordering the jailer to keep them safely.  having received this order he put them into the inner (ao)prison and fastened their feet in (ap)the stocks. (aq)about midnight paul and silas were praying and singing hymns to god and the prisoners were listening to them  and suddenly (ar)there was a great earthquake so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. and immediately (as)all the doors were opened and (at)everyone's bonds were unfastened.  when the jailer woke and saw that the prison doors were open he drew his sword and (au)was about to kill himself supposing that the prisoners had escaped.  but paul cried with a loud voice “do not harm yourself for we are all here.”  and the jailer[e] called for lights and rushed in and trembling with fear he (av)fell down before paul and silas.  then he brought them out and said “sirs (aw)what must i do to be (ax)saved?”  and they said (ay)“believe in the lord jesus and you will be saved you (az)and your household.”  and they spoke the word of the lord to him and to all who were in his house.  and he took them (ba)the same hour of the night and washed their wounds and he (bb)was baptized at once he and all his family.  then he brought them up into his house and set food before them. and he (bc)rejoiced along with his entire household that he had believed in god. but when it was day the magistrates sent the police saying “let those men go.”  and the jailer reported these words to paul saying “the magistrates have sent to let you go. therefore come out now and go in peace.”  but paul said to them “they have beaten us publicly (bd)uncondemned men who are roman citizens and have thrown us into prison and do they now throw us out secretly? no! let them come themselves and take us out.”  the police reported these words to the magistrates and (be)they were afraid when they heard that they were roman citizens.  so they came and apologized to them. and they took them out and (bf)asked them to leave the city.  so they went out of the prison and visited (bg)lydia. and when they had seen (bh)the brothers they encouraged them and departed. now when they had passed through amphipolis and apollonia they came to (a)thessalonica where there was a synagogue of the jews.  and paul went in (b)as was his custom and on three sabbath days he reasoned with them (c)from the scriptures  (d)explaining and proving that it was necessary for (e)the christ to suffer and (f)to rise from the dead and saying “this jesus whom i proclaim to you is the christ.”  and (g)some of them were persuaded and joined paul and silas as did (h)a great many of the devout (i)greeks and not a few of the leading women.  (j)but the jews[a] (k)were jealous and taking (l)some wicked men of the rabble they formed a mob set the city in an uproar and attacked the house of jason seeking to bring them out to the crowd.  and when they could not find them (m)they dragged jason and some of the brothers before the city authorities shouting “these men who have turned the world upside down have come here also  and jason has received them and they are all acting against (n)the decrees of caesar saying that there is (o)another king jesus.”  and the people and the city authorities were disturbed when they heard these things.  and when they had taken money as security from jason and the rest they let them go. (p)the brothers[b] immediately sent paul and silas away by night to berea and when they arrived they (q)went into the jewish synagogue.  now these jews were more noble than those in thessalonica they received the word with all eagerness (r)examining the scriptures daily to see if these things were so.  (s)many of them therefore believed with not a few greek (t)women of high standing as well as men.  but when the jews from thessalonica learned that the word of god was proclaimed by paul at berea also they came there too (u)agitating and stirring up the crowds.  then the brothers (v)immediately sent paul off on his way to the sea but silas and (w)timothy remained there.  (x)those who conducted paul brought him as far as (y)athens and after receiving a command (z)for silas and timothy to come to him as soon as possible they departed. now while paul was waiting for them at athens his spirit was (aa)provoked within him as he saw that the city was (ab)full of idols.  so (ac)he reasoned in the synagogue with the jews and the devout persons and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there.  some of the epicurean and stoic philosophers also conversed with him. and some said (ad)“what does this babbler wish to say?” others said “he seems to be a preacher of foreign divinities”—because (ae)he was preaching (af)jesus and the resurrection.  and they took him and brought him to (ag)the areopagus saying “may we know what this (ah)new teaching is that you are presenting?  for you bring some (ai)strange things to our ears. we wish to know therefore what these things mean.”  now all the athenians and the foreigners who lived there would spend their time in nothing except telling or hearing something new. so paul standing in the midst of the areopagus said “men of athens i perceive that in every way you are very religious.  for as i passed along and observed the objects of your worship i found also an altar with this inscription (aj)‘to the unknown god.’ (ak)what therefore you worship (al)as unknown this i proclaim to you.  (am)the god who made the world and everything in it being (an)lord of heaven and earth (ao)does not live in temples made by man[c]  nor is he served by human hands (ap)as though he needed anything since he himself (aq)gives to all mankind (ar)life and breath and everything.  and (as)he made from one man every nation of mankind to live (at)on all the face of the earth (au)having determined allotted periods and (av)the boundaries of their dwelling place  (aw)that they should seek god (ax)and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him. (ay)yet he is actually not far from each one of us  for (az)“‘in him we live and move and have our being’[d] as even some of (ba)your own poets have said “‘for we are indeed his offspring.’[e] (bb)being then god's offspring (bc)we ought not to think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone an image formed by the art and imagination of man.  (bd)the times of ignorance (be)god overlooked but (bf)now he (bg)commands all people everywhere to repent  because he has fixed (bh)a day on which (bi)he will judge the world (bj)in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed and (bk)of this he has given assurance to all (bl)by raising him from the dead.” now when they heard of (bm)the resurrection of the dead (bn)some mocked. but others said (bo)“we will hear you again about this.”  so paul went out from their midst.  but some men joined him and believed among whom also were dionysius (bp)the areopagite and a woman named damaris and others with them. after this paul[a] left athens and went to corinth.  and he found a jew named (a)aquila a native of pontus recently come from italy with his wife (b)priscilla because (c)claudius had commanded all the jews to leave rome. and he went to see them  and (d)because he was of the same trade he stayed with them and worked for they were tentmakers by trade.  and (e)he reasoned in the synagogue (f)every sabbath and tried to persuade jews and greeks. (g)when silas and timothy arrived from macedonia paul (h)was occupied with the word (i)testifying to the jews that the christ was (j)jesus.  and when they opposed and reviled him (k)he shook out his garments and said to them (l)“your blood be on your own heads! (m)i am innocent. (n)from now on i will go to the gentiles.”  and he left there and went to the house of a man named titius (o)justus (p)a worshiper of god. his house was next door to the synagogue.  (q)crispus the ruler of the synagogue believed in the lord together (r)with his entire household. and many of the corinthians hearing paul believed and were baptized.  and the lord said to paul (s)one night in (t)a vision (u)“do not be afraid but go on speaking and do not be silent  (v)for i am with you and (w)no one will attack you to harm you for (x)i have many in this city who are my people.”  and he stayed a year and six months teaching the word of god among them. but when gallio was (y)proconsul of achaia (z)the jews[b] made a united attack on paul and (aa)brought him before the tribunal  saying “this man is persuading people to worship god contrary to (ab)the law.”  but when paul was about to open his mouth gallio said to the jews “if it were a matter of wrongdoing or vicious (ac)crime o jews i would have reason to accept your complaint.  but (ad)since it is a matter of questions about words and names and (ae)your own law see to it yourselves. i refuse to be a judge of these things.”  and he drove them from the tribunal.  and they all seized sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue and beat him in front of the tribunal. but gallio paid no attention to any of this. after this paul stayed many days longer and then took leave of (af)the brothers[c] and set sail for syria and with him (ag)priscilla and aquila. at (ah)cenchreae (ai)he had cut his hair for he was under a vow.  and they came to (aj)ephesus and he left them there but (ak)he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the jews.  when they asked him to stay for a longer period he declined.  but on taking leave of them he said “i will return to you (al)if god wills” and he set sail from ephesus. when he had landed at caesarea he (am)went up and greeted the church and then went down to antioch.  after spending some time there he departed and (an)went from one place to the next through the region of galatia and phrygia (ao)strengthening all the disciples. now a jew named (ap)apollos a native of alexandria came to ephesus. he was an eloquent man (aq)competent in the scriptures.  he had been instructed in (ar)the way of the lord. and (as)being fervent in spirit[d] he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning jesus though he knew only (at)the baptism of john.  he began to speak boldly in the synagogue but when (au)priscilla and aquila heard him they took him aside and explained to him (av)the way of god more accurately.  and when he wished to cross to (aw)achaia (ax)the brothers encouraged him and (ay)wrote to the disciples to welcome him. when he arrived (az)he greatly helped those who through grace had believed  for he powerfully refuted the jews in public showing by the scriptures (ba)that the christ was jesus. and it happened that while (a)apollos was at corinth paul passed (b)through the inland[a] country and came to ephesus. there he found some disciples.  and he said to them (c)“did you receive the holy spirit when you believed?” and they said “no (d)we have not even heard that there is a holy spirit.”  and he said (e)“into what then were you baptized?” they said “into (f)john's baptism.”  and paul said (g)“john baptized with the baptism of repentance telling the people (h)to believe in the one who was to come after him that is jesus.”  on hearing this (i)they were baptized in[b] the name of the lord jesus.  and (j)when paul had laid his hands on them the holy spirit came on them and (k)they began speaking in tongues and (l)prophesying.  there were about twelve men in all. and (m)he entered the synagogue and for three months spoke boldly reasoning and persuading them (n)about the kingdom of god.  (o)but when some became stubborn and (p)continued in unbelief speaking evil of (q)the way before the congregation he withdrew from them and took the disciples with him reasoning daily in the hall of tyrannus.[c]  this continued for (r)two years so that (s)all the residents of asia heard the word of the lord both jews and greeks. and (t)god was doing extraordinary miracles by the hands of paul  (u)so that even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his skin were carried away to the sick and their diseases left them and (v)the evil spirits came out of them.  then some of the itinerant jewish (w)exorcists (x)undertook to invoke the name of the lord jesus over those who had evil spirits saying (y)“i adjure you by the jesus whom paul proclaims.”  seven sons of a jewish high priest named sceva were doing this.  but the evil spirit answered them (z)“jesus i know and paul i recognize but who are you?”  and the man in whom was the evil spirit leaped on them mastered all[d] of them and overpowered them so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.  and this became known to all the residents of ephesus both jews and greeks. and fear fell upon them all and (aa)the name of the lord jesus was extolled.  also many of those who were now believers came (ab)confessing and divulging their practices.  and a number of those who had practiced magic arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all. and they counted the value of them and found it came to fifty thousand pieces of silver.  so the word of the lord (ac)continued to increase and prevail mightily. now after these events paul resolved in the spirit (ad)to pass through (ae)macedonia and achaia and (af)go to jerusalem saying “after i have been there (ag)i must also see rome.”  and having sent into macedonia two of (ah)his helpers (ai)timothy and erastus he himself stayed in asia (aj)for a while. about that time (ak)there arose no little disturbance concerning (al)the way.  for a man named demetrius a silversmith who made silver shrines of artemis (am)brought no little business to the craftsmen.  (an)these he gathered together with the workmen in similar trades and said “men you know that from this business we have our wealth.  and you see and hear that not only in ephesus but in almost all of asia this paul has persuaded and turned away a great many people (ao)saying that (ap)gods made with hands are not gods.  and there is danger not only that this trade of ours may come into disrepute but also that the temple of the (aq)great goddess artemis may be counted as nothing and that she may even be deposed from her magnificence she whom all asia and the world worship.” when they heard this they were enraged and were crying out (ar)“great is artemis of the ephesians!”  so the city was filled with the confusion and they rushed together into the theater dragging with them gaius and (as)aristarchus macedonians who were paul's (at)companions in travel.  but when paul wished to go in among the crowd the disciples would not let him.  and even some of the asiarchs[e] who were friends of his sent to him and were urging him not to venture into the theater.  (au)now some cried out one thing some another for the assembly was in confusion and most of them did not know why they had come together.  some of the crowd prompted alexander whom the jews had put forward. and alexander (av)motioning with his hand wanted to make a defense to the crowd.  but when they recognized that he was a jew for about two hours they all cried out with one voice (aw)“great is artemis of the ephesians!” and when the town clerk had quieted the crowd he said “men of ephesus who is there who does not know that the city of the ephesians is temple keeper of the great artemis and of the sacred stone that fell from (ax)the sky?[f]  seeing then that these things cannot be denied you ought to be quiet and do nothing rash.  for you have brought (ay)these men here who are neither (az)sacrilegious nor blasphemers of our goddess.  if therefore demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a complaint against anyone the courts are open and there are (ba)proconsuls. let them bring charges against one another.  but if you seek anything further[g] it shall be settled in the regular assembly.  for we really are in danger of being charged with rioting today since there is no cause that we can give to justify this commotion.”  and when he had said these things he dismissed the assembly. after the uproar ceased paul sent for the disciples and after encouraging them he said farewell and (a)departed for macedonia.  when he had gone through those regions and had given them much encouragement he came to greece.  there he spent three months and when (b)a plot was made against him by the jews[a] as he was about to set sail for syria he decided to return through macedonia.  sopater the berean son of pyrrhus accompanied him and of the thessalonians (c)aristarchus and secundus and (d)gaius of derbe and (e)timothy and the asians (f)tychicus and (g)trophimus.  these went on ahead and were waiting for (h)us at (i)troas  but we sailed away from philippi after (j)the days of unleavened bread and in five days we came to them at troas where we stayed for seven days. (k)on the first day of the week when we were gathered together (l)to break bread paul talked with them intending to depart on the next day and he prolonged his speech until midnight.  there were many lamps in (m)the upper room where we were gathered.  and a young man named eutychus sitting at the window sank into a deep sleep as paul talked still longer. and being overcome by sleep he (n)fell down from the third story and was taken up dead.  but paul went down and (o)bent over him and taking him in his arms said (p)“do not be alarmed for his life is in him.”  and when paul had gone up and (q)had broken bread and eaten he conversed with them a long while until daybreak and so departed.  and they took the youth away alive and were not a little comforted. but going ahead to the ship we set sail for assos intending to take paul aboard there for so he had arranged intending himself to go by land.  and when he met us at assos we took him on board and went to mitylene.  and sailing from there we came the following day opposite chios the next day we touched at samos and[b] the day after that we went to miletus.  for paul had decided to sail past ephesus so that he might not have to spend time in asia for he was hastening (r)to be at jerusalem if possible (s)on the day of pentecost. now from miletus he sent to ephesus and called (t)the elders of the church to come to him.  and when they came to him he said to them (u)“you yourselves know (v)how i lived among you the whole time (w)from the first day that i set foot in asia  (x)serving the lord (y)with all humility and with (z)tears and with trials that happened to me through (aa)the plots of the jews  how i (ab)did not shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable and (ac)teaching you in public and from house to house  (ad)testifying both to jews and to greeks of (ae)repentance toward god and of (af)faith in our lord jesus christ.[c]  and now behold i am going to jerusalem constrained (ag)by[d] the spirit not knowing what will happen to me there  except that (ah)the holy spirit testifies to me in every city that (ai)imprisonment and (aj)afflictions await me.  but (ak)i do not account my life of any value nor as precious to myself if only (al)i may finish my course and (am)the ministry (an)that i received from the lord jesus (ao)to testify to (ap)the gospel of (aq)the grace of god.  and now behold (ar)i know that none of you among whom i have gone about (as)proclaiming the kingdom will see my face again.  therefore (at)i testify to you this day that (au)i am innocent of the blood of all  for (av)i did not shrink from declaring to you (aw)the whole counsel of god.  (ax)pay careful attention to yourselves and to all (ay)the flock in which (az)the holy spirit has made you (ba)overseers (bb)to care for (bc)the church of god[e] which he (bd)obtained (be)with his own blood.[f]  i (bf)know that after my departure (bg)fierce wolves will come in among you (bh)not sparing the flock  and (bi)from among your own selves will arise men speaking twisted things to draw away the disciples after them.  therefore (bj)be alert remembering that (bk)for three years i did not cease night or day (bl)to admonish every one (bm)with tears.  and now (bn)i commend you to god and to (bo)the word of his grace which is able to (bp)build you up and to give you (bq)the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.  (br)i coveted no one's silver or gold or apparel.  (bs)you yourselves know that (bt)these hands ministered to my necessities and (bu)to those who were with me.  in all things (bv)i have shown you that (bw)by working hard in this way we must (bx)help the weak and (by)remember the words of the lord jesus how he himself said ‘it is more blessed (bz)to give than to receive.’” and when he had said these things (ca)he knelt down and prayed with them all.  and (cb)there was much weeping on the part of all (cc)they embraced paul and (cd)kissed him  being sorrowful most of all because of (ce)the word he had spoken that they would not see his face again. and (cf)they accompanied him to the ship. and when (a)we had parted from them and set sail we (b)came by a straight course to cos and the next day to rhodes and from there to patara.[a]  and having found a ship crossing to phoenicia we went aboard and set sail.  when we had come in sight of cyprus leaving it on the left we sailed to syria and landed at tyre for there the ship was to unload its cargo.  and having sought out the disciples we stayed there for seven days. and (c)through the spirit they were telling paul not to go on to jerusalem.  when our days there were ended we departed and went on our journey and they all with wives and children (d)accompanied us until we were outside the city. and (e)kneeling down on the beach we prayed  and said farewell to one another. then we went on board the ship and they returned home. when we had finished the voyage from tyre we arrived at ptolemais and we greeted (f)the brothers[b] and stayed with them for one day.  on the next day we departed and came to caesarea and we entered the house of (g)philip (h)the evangelist who was one of the seven and stayed with him.  he had four unmarried daughters (i)who prophesied.  while we were staying for many days a prophet named (j)agabus came down from judea.  and coming to us he (k)took paul's belt and bound his own feet and hands and said (l)“thus says the holy spirit (m)‘this is how the jews[c] at jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt and (n)deliver him into the hands of the gentiles.’”  when we heard this we and the people there (o)urged him not to go up to jerusalem.  then paul answered (p)“what are you doing weeping and breaking my heart? for (q)i am ready not only to be imprisoned but even to die in jerusalem (r)for the name of the lord jesus.”  and since he would not be persuaded (s)we ceased and said (t)“let the will of the lord be done.” after these days we got ready and went up to jerusalem.  and some of the disciples from caesarea went with us bringing us to the house of mnason of cyprus an early disciple with whom we should lodge. when we had come to jerusalem (u)the brothers received us gladly.  on the following day paul went in with us to (v)james and all (w)the elders were present.  after greeting them (x)he related one by one (y)the things that god had done among the gentiles through his (z)ministry.  and when they heard it they (aa)glorified god. and they said to him “you see brother how many thousands there are among the jews of those who have believed. they are all (ab)zealous for the law  and they have been told about you that you teach all (ac)the jews who are among the gentiles to forsake moses (ad)telling them (ae)not to circumcise their children or (af)walk according to (ag)our customs.  what then is to be done? they will certainly hear that you have come.  do therefore what we tell you. we have four men (ah)who are under a vow  take these men and (ai)purify yourself along with them and pay their expenses (aj)so that they may shave their heads. thus all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about you but that you yourself also live in observance of the law.  but as for the gentiles who have believed (ak)we have sent a letter with our judgment that they should abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols and from blood and from what has been strangled[d] and from sexual immorality.”  then paul took the men and the next day (al)he purified himself along with them and (am)went into the temple giving notice when the days of purification would be fulfilled and (an)the offering presented for each one of them. when (ao)the seven days were almost completed (ap)the jews from asia (aq)seeing him in the temple stirred up the whole crowd and laid hands on him  crying out “men of israel help! this is the man who (ar)is teaching everyone everywhere against the people and (as)the law and (at)this place. moreover he even brought greeks into the temple and (au)has defiled (av)this holy place.”  for they had previously seen (aw)trophimus the ephesian with him in the city and they supposed that paul had brought him into the temple.  then all the city was stirred up and the people ran together. they seized paul and (ax)dragged him out of the temple and at once the gates were shut.  (ay)and as they were seeking to kill him word came to the tribune of (az)the cohort that all jerusalem was in confusion.  (ba)he at once took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. and when they saw the tribune and the soldiers they stopped beating paul.  then the tribune came up and arrested him and ordered him (bb)to be bound (bc)with two chains. he inquired who he was and what he had done.  (bd)some in the crowd were shouting one thing some another. and as he could not learn the facts because of the uproar he ordered him to be brought into (be)the barracks.  and when he came to the steps he was actually carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd  for the mob of the people followed crying out (bf)“away with him!” as paul was about to be brought into the barracks he said to the tribune “may i say something to you?” and he said “do you know greek?  are you not (bg)the egyptian then who recently stirred up a revolt and led the four thousand men of the assassins out (bh)into the wilderness?”  paul replied (bi)“i am a jew from tarsus in cilicia a citizen of no obscure city. i beg you permit me to speak to the people.”  and when he had given him permission paul standing on the steps (bj)motioned with his hand to the people. and when there was a great hush he addressed them in (bk)the hebrew language[e] saying (a)“brothers and fathers hear the defense that i now make before you.” and when they heard that he was addressing them in (b)the hebrew language[a] they became even more quiet. and he said (c)“i am a jew born in tarsus in cilicia but brought up in this city educated (d)at the feet of (e)gamaliel[b] (f)according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers (g)being zealous for god (h)as all of you are this day.  (i)i persecuted (j)this way (k)to the death binding and delivering to prison both men and women  as (l)the high priest and (m)the whole council of elders can bear me witness. from them i received letters to (n)the brothers and i journeyed toward damascus to take those also who were there and bring them in bonds to jerusalem to be punished. (o)“as i was on my way and drew near to damascus about noon a great light from heaven suddenly shone around me.  and i fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me ‘saul saul why are you persecuting me?’  and i answered ‘who are you lord?’ and he said to me ‘i am (p)jesus of nazareth whom you are persecuting.’  (q)now those who were with me saw the light but did not understand[c] the voice of the one who was speaking to me.  and i said (r)‘what shall i do lord?’ and the lord said to me ‘rise and go into damascus and there you will be told all that is appointed for you to do.’  and since i could not see because of the brightness of that light i was led by the hand by those who were with me and came into damascus. “and (s)one ananias a devout man (t)according to the law (u)well spoken of by all the jews who lived there  (v)came to me and standing by me said to me ‘brother saul receive your sight.’ and (w)at that very hour i received my sight and saw him.  and he said (x)‘the god of our fathers (y)appointed you to know his will (z)to see (aa)the righteous one and (ab)to hear a voice from his mouth  for (ac)you will be a witness for him to everyone of what (ad)you have seen and heard.  and now why do you wait? (ae)rise and be baptized and (af)wash away your sins (ag)calling on his name.’ (ah)“when i had returned to jerusalem and (ai)was praying in the temple i fell into (aj)a trance  and saw him saying to me (ak)‘make haste and get out of jerusalem quickly because they will not accept your testimony about me.’  and i said ‘lord they themselves know that in one synagogue after another (al)i imprisoned and (am)beat those who believed in you.  and when the blood of stephen (an)your witness was being shed (ao)i myself was standing by and (ap)approving and (aq)watching over the garments of those who killed him.’  and he said to me ‘go for i will send you (ar)far away to the gentiles.’” up to this word they listened to him. then they raised their voices and said (as)“away with such a fellow from the earth! for (at)he should not be allowed to live.”  and as they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air  the tribune ordered him to be brought into (au)the barracks saying that he should be (av)examined by flogging to find out why they were shouting against him like this.  but when they had stretched him out for the whips[d] paul said to the centurion who was standing by “is it lawful for you to flog (aw)a man who is a roman citizen and uncondemned?”  when the centurion heard this he went to the tribune and said to him “what are you about to do? for this man is a roman citizen.”  so the tribune came and said to him “tell me are you a roman citizen?” and he said “yes.”  the tribune answered “i bought this citizenship for a large sum.” paul said “but i am a citizen by birth.”  so those who were about (ax)to examine him withdrew from him immediately and the tribune also (ay)was afraid (az)for he realized that paul was a roman citizen and that (ba)he had bound him. but on the next day (bb)desiring to know the real reason why he was being accused by the jews he unbound him and commanded the chief priests and all the council to meet and he brought paul down and set him before them. and looking intently at the council paul said “brothers (a)i have lived my life before god in all good conscience up to this day.”  and the high priest (b)ananias commanded those who stood by him (c)to strike him on the mouth.  then paul said to him “god is going to strike you you (d)whitewashed (e)wall! are you sitting to judge me according to the law and yet (f)contrary to the law you (g)order me to be struck?”  those who stood by said “would you revile (h)god's high priest?”  and paul said (i)“i did not know brothers that he was the high priest for it is written (j)‘you shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.’” now when paul perceived that one part were (k)sadducees and the other pharisees he cried out in the council “brothers (l)i am a pharisee a son of pharisees. it is (m)with respect to the (n)hope and the resurrection of the dead that i am on trial.”  and when he had said this a dissension arose between the pharisees and the sadducees and the assembly was divided.  for the sadducees (o)say that there is no resurrection nor angel nor spirit but the pharisees acknowledge them all.  then a great clamor arose and some of (p)the scribes of the pharisees' party stood up and contended sharply (q)“we find nothing wrong in this man. what (r)if a spirit or an angel spoke to him?”  and when the dissension became violent the tribune afraid that paul would be torn to pieces by them commanded the soldiers to go down and take him away from among them by force and bring him into (s)the barracks. (t)the following night (u)the lord stood by him and said (v)“take courage for (w)as you have testified to the facts about me in jerusalem so you must (x)testify also in rome.” when it was day (y)the jews made a plot and (z)bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink till they had killed paul.  there were more than forty who made this conspiracy.  they went to the chief priests and elders and said “we have strictly bound ourselves by an oath to taste no food till we have killed paul.  now therefore you along with the council give notice to the tribune to bring him down to you as though you were going to determine his case more exactly. and we are ready to kill him before he comes near.” now the son of paul's sister heard of their ambush so he went and entered (aa)the barracks and told paul.  paul called one of the centurions and said “take this young man to the tribune for he has something to tell him.”  so he took him and brought him to the tribune and said “paul (ab)the prisoner called me and asked me to bring this young man to you as he has something to say to you.”  the tribune took him by the hand and going aside asked him privately “what is it that you have to tell me?”  and he said (ac)“the jews have agreed to ask you to bring paul down to the council tomorrow as though they were going to inquire somewhat more closely about him.  but do not be persuaded by them for more than forty of their men are lying in ambush for him who (ad)have bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink till they have killed him. and now they are ready waiting for your consent.”  so the tribune dismissed the young man charging him “tell no one that you have informed me of these things.” then he called two of the centurions and said “get ready two hundred soldiers with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen to go as far as caesarea at the third hour of the night.[a]  also provide mounts for paul to ride and bring him safely to (ae)felix (af)the governor.”  and he wrote a letter to this effect “claudius lysias to (ag)his excellency the governor felix (ah)greetings.  (ai)this man was seized by the jews and (aj)was about to be killed by them (ak)when i came upon them with the soldiers and rescued him (al)having learned that he was a roman citizen.  and (am)desiring to know the charge for which they were accusing him i brought him down to their council.  i found that he was being accused (an)about questions of their law but (ao)charged with nothing deserving death or imprisonment.  (ap)and when it was disclosed to me (aq)that there would be a plot against the man i sent him to you at once (ar)ordering his accusers also to state before you what they have against him.” so the soldiers according to their instructions took paul and brought him by night to antipatris.  and on the next day they returned to (as)the barracks letting the horsemen go on with him.  when they had come to caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor they presented paul also before him.  on reading the letter he asked what (at)province he was from. and when he learned (au)that he was from cilicia  he said “i will give you a hearing (av)when your accusers arrive.” and he commanded him to be guarded in herod's (aw)praetorium. and (a)after five days the high priest (b)ananias came down with some elders and a spokesman one tertullus. they laid before (c)the governor their case against paul.  and when he had been summoned tertullus began to accuse him saying “since through you we enjoy much peace and since by your foresight (d)most excellent felix reforms are being made for this nation  in every way and everywhere we accept this with all gratitude.  but to detain[a] you no further i beg you in your kindness to hear us briefly.  for we have found this man a plague (e)one who stirs up riots among all the jews throughout the world and is a ringleader of (f)the sect of the nazarenes.  (g)he even tried to profane the temple but we seized him.[b]  by examining him yourself you will be able to find out from him about everything of which we accuse him.” the jews also joined in the charge affirming that all these things were so. and when the governor had nodded to him to speak paul replied “knowing that for many years you have been a judge over this nation i cheerfully make my defense.  you can verify that (h)it is not more than twelve days since i (i)went up (j)to worship in jerusalem  and (k)they did not find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd either in the temple or in the synagogues or in the city.  (l)neither can they prove to you what they now bring up against me.  but this i confess to you that according to (m)the way which they call (n)a sect (o)i worship (p)the god of our fathers believing everything (q)laid down by the law and written in the prophets  (r)having (s)a hope in god which these men themselves accept that there will be (t)a resurrection (u)of both the just and the unjust.  so i always (v)take pains to have a (w)clear conscience toward both god and man.  now (x)after several years (y)i came to bring alms to (z)my nation and to present (aa)offerings.  while i was doing this they found me (ab)purified in the temple without any crowd or tumult. but (ac)some jews from asia—  (ad)they ought to be here before you and to make an accusation should they have anything against me.  or else let these men themselves say what wrongdoing they found when i stood before the council  other than this one thing (ae)that i cried out while standing among them ‘it is with respect to the resurrection of the dead that i am on trial before you this day.’” but felix having a rather accurate knowledge of (af)the way put them off saying “when lysias the tribune comes down i will decide your case.”  then he gave orders to the centurion that he (ag)should be kept in custody but have some liberty and that (ah)none of his friends should be prevented from attending to his needs. after some days felix came with his wife drusilla who was jewish and he sent for paul and heard him speak about (ai)faith (aj)in christ jesus.  and as he reasoned (ak)about righteousness and selfcontrol and the coming judgment felix was alarmed and said “go away for the present. (al)when i get an opportunity i will summon you.”  at the same time he hoped (am)that money would be given him by paul. so he sent for him often and conversed with him.  when two years had elapsed felix was succeeded by porcius (an)festus. and (ao)desiring to do the jews a favor (ap)felix left paul in prison. now three days after festus had arrived in (a)the province he went up to jerusalem from caesarea.  and the chief priests and the principal men of the jews (b)laid out their case against paul and they urged him  asking as a favor against paul[a] that he summon him to jerusalem—because (c)they were planning an ambush to kill him on the way.  festus replied that paul was being kept at caesarea and that he himself intended to go there shortly.  “so” said he “let the men of authority among you go down with me and if there is anything wrong about the man let them bring charges against him.” after he stayed among them not more than eight or ten days he went down to caesarea. and the next day he took his seat on (d)the tribunal and ordered paul to be brought.  when he had arrived the jews who had come down from jerusalem stood around him bringing many and serious charges against him (e)that they could not prove.  paul argued in his defense “neither (f)against (g)the law of the jews nor against the temple nor (h)against caesar have i committed any offense.”  but festus (i)wishing to do the jews a favor said to paul “do you wish to go up to jerusalem and there be tried on these charges before me?”  but paul said “i am standing before caesar's (j)tribunal where i ought to be tried. to the jews i have done no wrong as you yourself know very well.  if then i am a wrongdoer and have committed anything for which i deserve to die i do not seek to escape death. but if there is nothing to their charges against me no one can give me up to them. (k)i appeal to caesar.”  then festus when he had conferred with his council answered “to caesar you have appealed to caesar you shall go.” now when some days had passed agrippa the king and bernice arrived at caesarea and greeted festus.  and as they stayed there many days festus laid paul's case before the king saying (l)“there is a man left prisoner by felix  and when i was at jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the jews laid out their case (m)against him asking for a sentence of condemnation against him.  (n)i answered them that it was not the custom of the romans to give up anyone (o)before the accused met the accusers face to face and had opportunity to make his defense concerning the charge laid against him.  (p)so when they came together here i made no delay but on the next day took my seat on (q)the tribunal and ordered the man to be brought.  when the accusers stood up they brought no charge in his case of such evils as i supposed.  rather they (r)had certain points of dispute with him about their own religion and about (s)a certain jesus who was dead but whom paul asserted to be alive.  being at a loss how to investigate these questions i (t)asked whether he wanted to go to jerusalem and be tried there regarding them.  but (u)when paul had appealed to be kept in custody for the decision of (v)the emperor i ordered him to be held until i could send him to caesar.”  then (w)agrippa said to festus “i would like to hear the man myself.” “tomorrow” said he “you will hear him.” so on the next day (x)agrippa and bernice came with great pomp and they entered the audience hall with the military tribunes and the prominent men of the city. then at the command of festus paul was brought in.  and festus said “king agrippa and all who are present with us you see this man about whom (y)the whole jewish people petitioned me both in jerusalem and here (z)shouting that he ought not to live any longer.  but i found that (aa)he had done nothing deserving death. and (ab)as he himself appealed to (ac)the emperor i decided to go ahead and send him.  but i have nothing definite to write to my lord about him. therefore i have brought him before you all and especially before you king agrippa so that after we have examined him i may have something to write.  for it seems to me unreasonable in sending a prisoner not to indicate the charges against him.” so (a)agrippa said to paul “you have permission to speak for yourself.” then paul stretched out his hand and made his defense “i consider myself fortunate that it is before you king agrippa i am going to make my defense today (b)against all the accusations of the jews  especially because you are familiar with all the (c)customs and (d)controversies of the jews. therefore i beg you to listen to me patiently. (e)“my manner of life from my youth spent from the beginning among (f)my own nation and in jerusalem is known by all the jews.  they have known for a long time if they are willing to testify that (g)according to the strictest (h)party of our (i)religion i have lived as (j)a pharisee.  and now i stand here on trial because of my hope in (k)the promise made by god to our fathers  (l)to which (m)our twelve tribes hope to (n)attain as they earnestly worship night and day. and for this hope (o)i am accused by jews o king!  why is it thought (p)incredible by any of you that god raises the dead? (q)“i myself was convinced that i ought to do many things in opposing the name of (r)jesus of nazareth.  (s)and i did so in jerusalem. i not only locked up many of the saints in prison after receiving authority (t)from the chief priests but (u)when they were put to death i cast my vote against them.  and (v)i punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to make them (w)blaspheme and (x)in raging fury against them i (y)persecuted them even to foreign cities. “in this connection (z)i journeyed to damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.  at midday o king i saw on the way a light from heaven brighter than the sun that shone around me and those who journeyed with me.  and when we had all fallen to the ground i heard a voice saying to me (aa)in the hebrew language[a] ‘saul saul why are you persecuting me? it is hard for you to kick against the goads.’  and i said ‘who are you lord?’ and the lord said ‘i am jesus whom you are persecuting.  but rise and (ab)stand upon your feet for i have appeared to you for this purpose (ac)to appoint you as a servant and witness to the things in which you have seen me and to those in which i will appear to you  (ad)delivering you from your people and from the gentiles—(ae)to whom i (af)am sending you  (ag)to open their eyes so that they may turn from darkness to light and from (ah)the power of satan to god that they may receive (ai)forgiveness of sins and (aj)a place among those who are sanctified (ak)by faith in me.’ “therefore o king agrippa i was not disobedient to (al)the heavenly vision  but declared first (am)to those in damascus (an)then in jerusalem and throughout all the region of judea and also (ao)to the gentiles that they should (ap)repent and (aq)turn to god performing deeds (ar)in keeping with their repentance.  for this reason (as)the jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me.  (at)to this day i have had the help that comes from god and so (au)i stand here testifying both to small and great saying nothing but what (av)the prophets and moses said would come to pass  (aw)that the christ (ax)must suffer and that (ay)by being the first (az)to rise from the dead (ba)he would proclaim (bb)light both to our people and to the gentiles.” and as he was saying these things in his defense festus said with a loud voice “paul (bc)you are out of your mind your great learning is driving you out of your mind.”  but paul said “i am not out of my mind (bd)most excellent festus but i am speaking (be)true and (bf)rational words.  for (bg)the king knows about these things and to him i speak boldly. for i am persuaded that none of these things has escaped his notice for this has not been done in a corner.  king agrippa do you believe the prophets? i know that you believe.”  and agrippa said to paul “in a short time would you persuade me to be (bh)a christian?”[b]  and paul said “whether short or long i would to god that not only you but also all who hear me this day (bi)might become such as i am—except for (bj)these chains.” then the king rose and (bk)the governor and bernice and those who were sitting with them.  and when they had withdrawn they said to one another (bl)“this man is doing nothing to deserve death or imprisonment.”  and agrippa said to festus (bm)“this man could have been set (bn)free if he had not appealed (bo)to caesar.” and when it was decided (a)that (b)we should sail for italy they delivered paul and some other prisoners to a centurion of the augustan (c)cohort named julius.  and embarking in a ship of adramyttium which was about to sail to the ports along the coast of asia we put to sea accompanied by (d)aristarchus a macedonian from thessalonica.  the next day we put in at sidon. and (e)julius (f)treated paul kindly and (g)gave him leave to go to his friends and be cared for.  and putting out to sea from there we sailed under the lee of cyprus because the winds were against us.  and when we had sailed across the open sea along the coast of cilicia and pamphylia we came to myra in lycia.  there the centurion found (h)a ship of alexandria sailing for italy and put us on board.  we sailed slowly for a number of days and arrived with difficulty off cnidus and as the wind did not allow us to go farther we sailed under the lee of crete off salmone.  coasting along it with difficulty we came to a place called fair havens near which was the city of lasea. since much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous because even (i)the fast[a] was already over paul advised them  saying “sirs i perceive that the voyage will be with (j)injury and much loss not only of the cargo and the ship but also of our lives.”  but the centurion paid more attention to (k)the pilot and to the owner of the ship than to what paul said.  and because the harbor was not suitable to spend the winter in the majority decided to put out to sea from there on the chance that somehow they could reach phoenix a harbor of crete facing both southwest and northwest and spend the winter there. now when the south wind blew gently supposing that they had obtained their purpose they weighed anchor and sailed along crete close to the shore.  but soon a tempestuous wind called the northeaster (l)struck down from the land.  and when the ship was caught and could not face the wind we gave way to it and were driven along.  running under the lee of a small island called cauda[b] we managed with difficulty to secure the ship's boat.  after hoisting it up they used supports to undergird the ship. then fearing that they would (m)run aground on the syrtis they lowered the gear[c] and thus they were driven along.  since we were violently stormtossed they began the next day (n)to jettison the cargo.  and on the third day they threw the ship's tackle overboard with their own hands.  when neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and no small tempest lay on us all hope of our being saved was at last abandoned. since they had been without food for a long time paul stood up among them and said “men (o)you should have listened to me and not have set sail from crete and incurred this (p)injury and loss.  yet now i urge you to (q)take heart for there will be no loss of life among you but only of the ship.  for this very night (r)there (s)stood before me (t)an angel of the god (u)to whom i belong and (v)whom i worship  and he said ‘do not be afraid paul (w)you must stand before caesar. and behold (x)god has granted you all those who sail with you.’  so take heart men for i have faith in god that it will be exactly as i have been told.  but (y)we must (z)run aground on some island.” when the fourteenth night had come as we were being driven across the adriatic sea about midnight the sailors suspected that they were nearing land.  so they took a sounding and found twenty fathoms.[d] a little farther on they took a sounding again and found fifteen fathoms.[e]  and fearing that we might (aa)run on the rocks they let down four anchors from the stern and prayed for day to come.  and as the sailors were seeking to escape from the ship and had lowered (ab)the ship's boat into the sea under pretense of laying out anchors from the bow  paul said to the centurion and the soldiers “unless these men stay in the ship you cannot be saved.”  then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the ship's boat and let it go. as day was about to dawn paul urged them all to take some food saying “today is the fourteenth day that you have continued in suspense and without food having taken nothing.  therefore i urge you to take some food. for it will give you strength[f] for (ac)not a hair is to perish from the head of any of you.”  and when he had said these things he took bread and (ad)giving thanks to god in the presence of all he broke it and began to eat.  then they all (ae)were encouraged and ate some food themselves.  (we were in all [g] (af)persons in the ship.)  and when they had eaten enough they lightened the ship (ag)throwing out the wheat into the sea. now when it was day (ah)they did not recognize the land but they noticed a bay with a beach on which they planned if possible to run the ship ashore.  so they cast off the anchors and left them in the sea at the same time loosening the ropes that tied the rudders. then hoisting the foresail to the wind they made for the beach.  but striking a reef[h] (ai)they ran the vessel aground. the bow stuck and remained immovable and the stern was being broken up by the surf.  (aj)the soldiers' plan was to kill the prisoners lest any should swim away and escape.  but the centurion (ak)wishing to save paul kept them from carrying out their plan. he ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and make for the land  and the rest on planks or on pieces of the ship. and so it was that (al)all were brought safely to land. after we were brought safely through (a)we then learned that (b)the island was called malta.  (c)the native people[a] showed us unusual (d)kindness for they kindled a fire and welcomed us all because it had begun to rain and was cold.  when paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and put them on the fire a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his hand.  when (e)the native people saw the creature hanging from his hand they said to one another (f)“no doubt this man is a murderer. though he has escaped from the sea (g)justice[b] has not allowed him to live.”  he however (h)shook off the creature into the fire and suffered no harm.  they were waiting for him to swell up or suddenly fall down dead. but when they had waited a long time and saw no misfortune come to him (i)they changed their minds and (j)said that he was a god. now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island named publius who received us and entertained us hospitably for three days.  it happened that the father of publius lay sick with fever and dysentery. and paul visited him and (k)prayed and (l)putting his hands on him healed him.  and when this had taken place the rest of the people on the island who had diseases also came and were cured.  they also honored us greatly[c] and when we were about to sail they put on board whatever we needed. after three months we set sail in (m)a ship that had wintered in the island a ship of alexandria with the twin gods[d] as a figurehead.  putting in at syracuse we stayed there for three days.  and from there we made a circuit and arrived at rhegium. and after one day a south wind sprang up and on the second day we came to puteoli.  there we found (n)brothers[e] and were invited to stay with them for seven days. and so we came to rome.  and (o)the brothers there when they heard about us came as far as the forum of appius and three taverns to meet us. on seeing them (p)paul thanked god and took courage.  and when we came into rome (q)paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him. after three days he called together the local leaders of the jews and when they had gathered he said to them “brothers (r)though i had done nothing against our people or (s)the customs of our fathers yet i was delivered as a prisoner from jerusalem into the hands of the romans.  when they had examined me they (t)wished to set me at liberty (u)because there was no reason for the death penalty in my case.  but because the jews objected i was compelled (v)to appeal to caesar—though i had no charge to bring against (w)my nation.  for this reason therefore i have asked to see you and speak with you since it is (x)because of (y)the hope of israel that i am wearing (z)this (aa)chain.”  and they said to him “we have received no letters from judea about you and none of (ab)the brothers coming here has reported or spoken any evil about you.  but we desire to hear from you what your views are for with regard to this (ac)sect we know that everywhere (ad)it is spoken against.” when they had appointed a day for him they came to him at his lodging in greater numbers. from morning till evening (ae)he expounded to them testifying to (af)the kingdom of god and (ag)trying to convince them about jesus (ah)both from the law of moses and from the prophets.  and (ai)some were convinced by what he said but others disbelieved.  and disagreeing among themselves they departed after paul had made one statement (aj)“the holy spirit was right in saying to your fathers through isaiah the prophet (ak)“‘go to this people and say(al)“you will indeed hear but never understand    and you will indeed see but never perceive.” (am)for this people's heart has grown dull    and with their ears they can barely hear    and their eyes they have closedlest they should see with their eyes    and hear with their earsand understand with their heart    and (an)turn and i would heal them.’ therefore let it be known to you that (ao)this (ap)salvation of god (aq)has been sent to the gentiles (ar)they will listen.”[f] he lived there two whole years at his own expense[g] and (as)welcomed all who came to him  (at)proclaiming (au)the kingdom of god and teaching about the lord jesus christ (av)with all boldness and (aw)without hindrance.